[Social Movement] 

Reveal to these depraved, 
O Republic, by foiling their plots, 
Yout great Medusa face 
Ringed by red lightning. 

— French workers' song around 1850, cited in Adolf Stahr, £wei 
Monate in Pans (Oldenburg, 1851), vol. 2, p. 199 

Rabble of the faithless, the soulless, the rootless, 
Who want to wipe out every art and industry, 
lb crush underfoot the cult of the Cross, 
And drown in an ocean of blood and flames 
— Its waves have risen round the flanks of Paris — 
Temples, palaces, priests, peoples, and kings! 

— Edouard d'Angiemont, L Internationale (Paris, 1871), p. 7 
Palermo has Etna; Paris, lapemee. 

— Victor Hugo, Paris [Litterature et philosophie melee (Paris, 1867), 
pp. 466-467], cited in Georges Batault, Le Pontife de la demagogie: 
Victor Hugo (Paris, 1934), p. 203 



"Since the Surrealists constantly confuse moral nonconformism with proletarian 
revolution, they attempt, instead of following the course of the modern world, to 
relocate themselves to a historical moment when this confusion was still possible, 
a moment anterior to the Congress of Tours, anterior even to the development of 
Marxism: the period of the 1820s, '30s and '40s." Emmanuel Berl, "Premier 
Pamphlet," Europe, 75 (March 15, 1929), p. 402. And that is certainly no acci- 
dent. For, on the one hand, we have here elements — anthropological materialism, 
hostility toward progress — which are refractory to Marxism, while, on the other 
hand, the will to apocatastasis speaks here, the resolve to gather again, in revolu- 
tionary action and in revolutionary drinking, precisely the elements of the "too 
early" and the "too late," of the first beginning and the final decay. [al,l] 

It is really imperative that we understand, in precisely its polemical bearing, the 
apotheosis of organization and of rationalism which the Communist party has to 



promote unceasingly in the face of feudal and hierarchical powers, and that we be 
clear about the fact that the movement itself comprehends mystical elements as 
well, although of an entirely different sort. It is even more important, naturally, „ 
not to confuse these mystical elements, which pertain to corporality, with relig- v> 
ious elements. [al,2] sr 



Episode of the February Revolution. On the twenty-third, at eleven o'clock in the 
evening, a fusillade on the Boulevard des Capucines: twenty-three dead. "The 
corpses are immediately paraded through the streets in a masterly, romantic mise 
en scene. 'Midnight is about to sound. The boulevards arc stiJl faintly lighted by 
the fading illumination [the celebratory illumination occasioned by the retreat of 
Guizot]. The doors and windows of the houses and shops are shut, everyone 
having returned home with heavy hearts. . . . All of a sudden, a muffled rumbling 
is heard on the paving stones, and some windows are cautiously opened. ... In a 
cart drawn by a white horse, with a bare-armed worker holding the reins, five 
cadavers are arranged in horrible symmetry. Standing on the shaft is a child of the 
working class, sallow of complexion, a fixed and ardent look upon his face, his arm 
extended, nearly immobile, as though to represent the Genius of Vengeance; lean- 
ing backward, this boy lights up, with the beams of his torch, the body of a young 
woman whose livid neck and hosom are stained with a long trail of blood. From 
time to time another worker, positioned behind the cart, raises this lifeless body 
with a muscular arm and — his torch all the while emitting sparks and flakes of 
fire — casts his savage gaze over the crowd, shouting, "Vengeance! Ven- 
geance! They are slaughtering the people!" "To Arms!" respond some voices; and 
the corpse falls back into the hottom of the cart, which continues on its way."' 
(Daniel Stern). Duhech and d'Espezel, Histoire de Paris (Paris, 1926), p. 396. 
D Lighting D [al,3] 



The masses of workers mobilized by Haussmann were compared — unfavorably — 
to those incorporated in the national workshops of 1848. D Haussmann D [al,4] 

"The favorite readings of the working-class tailor are the histories of the Revolu- 
tion of 1789. He likes it when these texts develop the idea that this revolution was a 
good thing, and that it improved the condition of the working class. He is inspired 
by the aura of drama lent to men and events by several famous authors. . . . Not 
perceiving that the principal cause of his social inferiority bes within himself, he 
likes to think that these men are the models for those who, in forging a new 
progress, will preserve him from all kinds of calamities." F. Le Play, Les Ouvriers 
europeens < Paris, 1855 >, p. 277. [al,5] 



"Street warfare today has its own technique; it was perfected, after the armed 
takeover of Munich <1848?>, in a curious little confidential work published with 
great secrecy hy the government in Berlin. One no longer advances through the 
streets; they are left empty. A path is opened within the interiors of houses, hy 



breaking through walls. As soon as one has taken a street, one organizes it; lines of 
communication are laid through the holes in the walls, while, to prevent the return 
of the adversary, one immediately mines the conquered ground. . . . Perhaps the 
clearest sign of progress, here, is that one need not concern oneself at all with 
sparing houses or lives. Compared with civil wars of the future, the episode of the 
Rue Transnonain <see al0a,5> will seem quite . . . innocent and archaic." Duhech 
and d'Espezel, Histoire de Paris (Paris, 1926), p. 479. □ Haussmann □ [ala,l] 

Family hudget of a Parisian ragpicker, 1849-1851, according to F. Le Play, Les 
Ouvriers europeens (Paris, 1855), pp. 274—275. An excerpt: "Section 4. Expenses 
I'mr moral improvement, recreation, and health. . . . Instruction for the children: 
school fees paid by employer, 48 francs; books purchased, 1 franc 45 centimes; 
relief and ahns (workers at this level ordinarily give no alms at all). Recreation and 
festivities: meal taken together by the entire family at one of the bai-rieres of Paris 
(eight excursions per year), including wine, bread, and fried potatoes, 8 francs; 
meal of macaroni, with butter, cheese, and wine, taken on Christmas, Mardi Gras, 
Easter, and Pentecost: expenses included in the first section; chewing tobacco for 
the worker (cigar butts collected by the worker), 6.8 kilos worth 5-34 francs; snuff 
for the wife (purchased), 2.33 kilos worth 18 francs 66 centimes; toys and other 
gifts given to the child, 1 franc. . . . Correspondence with relatives: letters from 
the worker's brothers living in Italy, on average one per year. . . . Note: The main 
resource for the family, in case of accidents, is private charity. . . . Savings for the 
year (the worker — altogether incapable of prudent habits, and desirous, above 
all, of giving his wife and little girl all the comforts they deserve — never manages to 
save anything; he spends, day by day, all he earns)." [ala,2] 

"The damage done to the morality of the improvident worker by the substitution 
of antagonism for solidarity consists precisely in the loss of all opportunity of 
exercising his natural virtues in the only way that would be practicable for him. 
The devotion displayed in the wish to do well, in the concern for the interests of the 
employer, or in the sacrifice of needs and desires irreconcilable with the regularity 
of work is, in fact, more feasible for the worker than the devotion which would 
lead to assisting his comrades with a sum of money. . . . The faculty of giving aid 
and protection of any consequence belongs to the upper classes; it can manifest 
itself among the workers as an immediate and short-lived enthusiasm, but the 
virtue most within their reach is clearly the performance of their task for the 
employer." M. F. Le Play, Les Ouvriers europeens (Paris, 1855), "Printed by 
authority of the Emperor and the Imperial Press," p. 278. [ala,3] 

The "small landowners of the suburbs." "They cultivate vines . . . that produce a 
wine of inferior quality, for which the consumption tax in effect inside the capital 
ensures a profitable market in the suburbs." F. Le Play, Les Ouvriers europeens 
(Paris, 1855), p. 271. [ala,4] 

"There is a tropical plant that for years remains unremarkable and brings forth 
no blossom, until finally, one day, an explosion resounds like a rifie shot and, some 



clays later, from out of this thicket a wonderful giant of a flower arises, whose 
growth is so rapid that one can witness its unfolding with the naked eye. Just so 
paltry and stunted remained the French working class in a corner of society, until 
suddenly the explosion of the February Revolution was heard. But with that, a 
gigantic blossom shot up from the unremarkable bushes, and this bloom fuJl of sap 
and vitality, fuJl of beauty and significance, was called the association <a term 
derived from the Saint-Simonians> ." Siginund Englander, Geschichte der fran- 
zbsischen Arbeiter-Associutionen (Hamburg, 1864), vol. 4, p. 217. [a2,l] 

Organization of the state workshops (ateliers nationaux) by Thomas. "It suffices 
to mention that Emile Thomas divided the workers into brigades and companies, 
and that their cliiefs were elected by universal suffrage of the workers. Every 
company had its flag, and Emile Thomas made use, for this organization, of other 
civil engineers and of students from the Ecole Polytechnique, who, through their 
youth, exerted a moral influence on the workers. . . . Nevertheless, although the 
minister of public works ordered the state engineers to come up with proposals for 
works . . . , the engineers in charge of bridges and roads decided not to comply with 
the minister's order, for in France there had long been a great rivalry between 
state engineers and civil engineers,' and it was the latter who directed the national 
workshops. Thomas was therefore left to his own resources, and he never could 
assign to such an army of workers, whose ranks were daily swelling, any sort of 
useful work. Thus, for example, he had trees from the outskirts of Paris brought 
into the city to be planted along the boulevards, because during the struggles of 
Fehruary the old trees on the boulevard had been cut down. The workers with the 
trees paraded slowly across Paris, singing as they went. . . . Other workers, who 
had the job, for example, of cleaning the railings of bridges, became an object of 
derision for passersby, and so the majority of these workers also wound up passing 
their time in mere cardplaying, singing, and the like. . . . The national workshops 
before long became . . . the gathering place for all sorts of vagabonds and idlers, 
whose lahor consisted exclusively in marching through the streets with their stan- 
dard hearers, here and there mending the pavement or turning up earth, but on 
the whole- — singing and shouting, ragtag and unruly — doing whatever came into 
their heads. . . . One day, there suddenly appeared on the scene 600 actors, paint- 
ers, artists, and agents, who together announced that, since the republic was 
guaranteeing work to all citizens, they too were putting forward their claim. 
Thomas made them inspectors." Siginund Englander, Geschichte der franzbsi- 
schen Arbeiter-Associationen (Hamburg, 1864), vol. 2, pp. 268-271. □ Flaneur □ 

[a2,2] 



"Neither the mayors nor the police commissioners, who had to sign the certificates 
attesting to the hearers' eligibility to work in Paris, could maintain the slightest 
control in view of the threats circulating against them. In their anxiety, they even 
gave certificates to ten-year-old children, who, with these in hand, presented 
themselves for admission to the national workshops." Sigmund Englander, 
Geschichte der franzdsischen Arbeiter-Associationen (Hamburg, 1864), vol. 2, 
p. 272. [a2a,l] 



Episodes in the June Insurrection: "Women were seen pouring boiling oil or hot 
water on the soldiers while shrieking and bellowing. In many places, insurgents 
were given hrandy mixed with various ingredients, so that they would he excited to 
madness. . . . Some women cut off the sexual organs of several imprisoned guards- 
men, and we know that an insurgent dressed in woman's clothing beheaded a 
number of captured officers . . .; people saw the heads of soldiers on pikes that 
were planted atop barricades. Many things recounted were pure invention — for 
example, that the insurgents had pinioned captured guardsmen between two 
hoards and sawed them, while alive, into pieces. On the other hand, things did in 
fact occur that were no less horrihle. . . . Many insurgents used bullets of a type 
that could not be removed from wounds after shooting, hecause a wire had heen 
inserted into these bullets which sprang out from the sides of them on impact. 
Behind numerous barricades were spray guns, which were used to spray sulphuric 
acid on attacking soldiers. It would be impossible to detail all the fiendish harhari- 
ties perpetrated by both sides in this action; we shall merely ohserve that world 
history can point to nothing comparable." Englander, vol. 2, pp. 288-289. 

[a2a,2] 

June Insurrection. "On many closed shops, the insurgents would write: 'Respect 
Property! Death to Thieves!' Many flags on the barricades bore the words: 'Bread 
and Work.' On the Rue Saint-Martin, on thefi rstday, a jeweler's shop stayed open 
without being threatened by any sort of harm, while, a few steps beyond, a store 
with a supply of scrap iron was plundered. . . . Many insurgents, during the bat- 
tle, had assemhled their wives and children on the barricades, and cried: 'Since we 
can no longer feed them, we want at least to die all together!' While the men 
fought, the women made gunpowder and their children cast bullets, using every 
piece of lead or tin that fell into their hands. Often the children molded the bullets 
with thimbles. At night, while the combatants were sleeping, girls would drag 
paving stones to the harricades." Englander, vol. 2, pp. 291, 293. [a2a,3] 

Barricades of 1848: "More than 400 were counted. Many, fronted by trenches and 
battlements, reached a height of two stories." Malet and Grillet, XIX" Siecle 
(Paris, 1919), p. 249. [a2a,4] 

"In 1839, some workers in Paris founded a newspaper with the title La Ruche 
populaire. 2 . . . The editorial office of this publication was located in the poorest 
section of the city, on the Rue des Quatre Fils. It was one of the few worker-run 
newspapers to have an audience among the general population, which can be 
explained by the tendency it followed. That is, it took as its program the goal of 
hringing hidden misery to the notice of wealthy benefactors. ... In the office of 
this journal a register of misery lay open, in which every starveling could inscribe 
his name. It was imposing, this register of misfortune, and since at this period Les 
Mysteres de Paris, hy Eugene Sue, had hrought charity into fashion within high 
society, one often saw private carriages pull up hefore the dirty premises of the 
editorial office and blase ladies step forth to secure addresses of the unfortunate; 



they would then deliver alms personally to these people and, in this way, derive a o 
novel stimulus for their jaded nerves. Each number of this workers' review began _^ 
with a summary enumeration of the poor people who had registered with the g 
editor; details of their plight could be found in the register itself. . . . Even after v> 
the February Revolution, at a time when all social classes looked on one another 
with distrust, . . . La Ruche populaire continued to facilitate personal contacts g 
between rich and poor. . . . This is all the more remarkahle in light of the fact that, % 
even during this period, all articles in La Ruche populaire were written by actual g 
workers engaged in some practical occupation." Sigmund Englander, Geschichte 
derfranzosischenArbeiter-Associationen (Hamhurg, 1864), vol. 2, pp. 78-80, 82- 
83. [a3,l] 

"The expansion achieved by industry in Paris during the past thirty years has 
given a certain importance to the trade of ragpicker, which occupies the lowest 
level on the industrial scale. Men, women, and children can all easily devote them- 
selves to the practice of this trade, which requires no apprenticeship and calls for 
tools that are as simple as its methods — a basket, a hook, and a lantern comprising 
the ragpieker's only equipment. The adult ragpicker, in order to earn 25-40 sous 
per day (depending on the season), is ordinarily obliged to make three rounds, two 
during the day and one at night; the first two take place from five o'clock in the 
morning until nine o'clock, and from eleven o'clock until [here, there are four 
pages missing from the copy in the Bibliotheque Nationale!]. Like salaried work- 
ers, they have a habit of frequenting taverns. . . . Like them, and more than them, 
they make a show of the expenditures which this habit entails. Among the older 
ragpickers and particularly among the older women, spirits hold an attraction like 
nothing else. . . . The ragpickers are not always content with ordinary wine in 
these taverns; they like to order mulled wine, and they take great offense if this 
drink does not contain, along with a strong dose of sugar, the aroma produced hy 
the use of lemons." H.-A. Fregier, Des Classes dangereuses de la population 
<dans les grandes villes et des moyens de les rendre meilleures> (Paris, 1840), vol. 
1, pp. 104, 109. [a3,2] 

Fregier speaks at length about the public scriveners, 3 who must have stood in the 
worst repute, and from whose circles emerges one Lacenaire, esteemed for his 
heautiful handwriting. — "I heard tell of an old sailor endowed with a remarkable 
talent for line handwriting, who, in the depths of the winter, had nary a shirt on 
his back, and would hide his nakedness hy fastening his waistcoatwith a pin. This 
individual, who was scarcely clothed, and who was not only ragged hut nauseat- 
ingly filthy, would on occasion spend five to six francs on his dinner." H.-A. 
Fregier, Des Classes dangereuses dela population (Paris, 1840), vol. 1, pp. 117— 
118. [a3a,l] 



"If it happens that an entrepreneur reproaches a worker in the presence of his 
comrades, and in a manner he feels to he unjust, . . . then the worker lays down his 
tools and heads for the tavern. ... In many industrial establishments that are not 



rigorously monitored, the worker is not satisfied with going to the tavern before 
the hour when work begins and at his mealtimes, which are at nine o'clock and two 
o'clock; he goes there also at four «'clock and in the evening, on the way home. . . . 
There are women who have no compunctions about following their husbands to 
the barriere, in company with their children (who are already able to work), in 
order, as they say, to live it up. . . . There they spend a large portion of the income 
of the entire family, and return home Monday evening in a state bordering on 
drunkenness. Indeed, they often pretend — the children no less than their par- 
ents — to be more inebriated than they really are, so that everyone will know 
they've been drinking, and drinking well." H.-A. Fregier, Des Classes dan- 
gereuses de la population (Paris, 1840), vol. 1, pp. 79-80, 86. [a3a,2] 

On child labor among textile workers: "Unable to meet the costs of food and of 
caringf or their children on their modest salary, which often does not exceed forty 
sous per day (not even when added to the salary of the wife, who earns barely half 
that amount), . . . workers find themselves obliged ... to place their children, as 
soon as they are old enough to work (ordinarily, at age seven or eight), in the 
establishments of which we are speaking. . . . The workers keep their children 
working in the factory or mill until the age of twelve. At that point, they see that 
the children make their first Communion, and then they secure them an appren- 
ticeship in a shop." H.-A. Fregier, vol. 1, pp. 98-100. [a3a,3] 

There's brass in our pockets, 

Pierre, let's go live it up; 

On Mondays, don't you know, 

I love to knock about. 

I know of a sixpenny wine 

That's not half bad, 

So let's have some fun, 

Let's go up to the barriere. 

H. Gourdon de Genouillac, Les Refrains de la rue, de 1830 a 1870 (Paris, 1879), 
p. 56. [a3a,4] 

"And what wine! What variety — from hordeaux to burgundy, from burgundy to 
full-bodied Saint-Georges, to Liinel and the South's Frontignan, and from there to 
sparkling champagne! What a choice of whites and reds — from Petit Macon or 
chahlis to Chambertin, to Chateau Larose, to sauterne, to Vin du RoussiJlon, and 
Ai' Mousseux! Bear in mind that each of these wines produces a different sort of 
intoxication, and that with a few bottles one can pass through all the intervening 
stages from a Musard quadrille to "La Marseillaise," from the wanton pleasures of 
the cancan to the fiery ardor of revolutionary fever, thence to return, with a hottle 
of champagne, to the cheeriest carnival mood in the world! And only France has a 
Paris, a city in which European civilization attains its fullest flowering, in which 
all the nerve fibers of European history are intertwined, and from which arise, at 



regular intervals, those tremors which shake the terrestrial globe; a city whose 
population unites, like that of no other city on earth, the passion for enjoyment 
with the passion for historical action, whose inhabitants know how to live like the 
most refined of Athenian epicures and to die like the most unflinching Spartan — 
Alcibiades and Leonidas rolled up into one; a city which really is, as Louis Blanc 
says, the heart and brain of the world." Friedrich Engels, "Von Paris nach Bern: 
Ein Reisefragment," Die neue Zeit, 17, no. 1 (Stuttgart, 1899), p. 10. — In his 
foreword to this publication of the posthumous manuscript, Eduard Bernstein 
writes: "Although a fragment, this travel sketch gives us, perhaps, a better picture 
of its author than does any other of his works" (ibid., p. 8). [a4,l] 



A song, "Jenny the Worker," whose refrain was inspiring to women: 

In a garden, 'neath a fragrant bower, 
You may hear a familiar bird: 
'Tis the singing of Jenny the worker, 
At heart content, content with little. 
She could be rich, but prefers 
The things she has from God. 

H. Gourdon de Genouillac, Les Refrains de la rue, de 1830 m. 1870 (Paris, 1879), 
pp. 67-68. [a4,2] 



A reactionary song, after the June Insurrection: 

See, see this funeral procession! 

It's the archbishop — friends, remove your hats; 

Victim, alas, of sacrilegious comhat, 

He is fallen for the liappiness of all."' 1 

H. Gourdon de Genouillac, Les Refrains de Im rue, de 1830 m 1870 (Paris, 1879), 
p. 78. [a4a,l] 



"The proletarians have . . . composed a terrible, bitter "Marseillaise," which they 
sing in unison in the workshops, and which may be judged by the refrain: 'Sow the 
field, all you proles; / It's the idler who will reap. '" "Die socialistischen und com- 
munistischen Bewegungen seit der dritten franzosischen Revolution," opening of 
Stein's Socialismus und Communismus des heutigen Frankreichs (Leipzig and 
Vienna, 1848), p. 210 [from V. Considerant, Theorie du droit de propriete et du 
droit de travail <1848>]. [a4a,2] 



Buret reports on a story in La Revue britannique of December 1839 (?), p. 29 (?): 
"The associated workers of Brighton consider machines to be absolutely 
beneficial. 'But,' they add, 'they are fatal as applied in the current regime. In- 
stead of dutifully serving, as the elves served the shoemaker in the German fairy 
tale, the machines have behaved like Frankenstein's monster (German legend), 
who, after acquiring life, employed it only in persecuting the man who had given it 



to him. '" Eugene Buret, La Misere des classes laborieuses en Angleterre et en 
France (Paris, 1840), vol. 2, p. 219. [a4a,3] 



"If the vices of the lower classes were limited, in their effects, to those who in- 
dulged in them, we may suppose that the upper classes would cease to concern 
themselves with all these dismal questions, and would happily leave the world at 
large to the sway of good and bad causes that rule over it. But . . . everything is 
linked together. If poverty is the mother of vices, then vice is the father of crime; 
and it is in this way that the interests of all the classes are conjoined." Eugene 
Buret, La Misere des classes laborieuses en Angleterre et en France (Paris, 1840), 
vol. 2, p. 262. [a4a,4] 

"Jenny the Worker brings to life one of the most terrible afflictions of the social 
organism: the daughter of the working class . . . constrained to sacrifice her virtue 
for her family, and to sell herself ... in order to provide bread for her loved 
ones .... As for the prologue to Jenny the Worker, it acknowledges neither the 
play's point of departure nor the details of poverty and hunger." Victor Hallays- 
Dahot, La Censure dramatique et le theatre, 1850-1870 (Paris, 1871), pp. 75-76. 

[a4a,5] 

"In the mind of the factory boss, workers are not men but forces, and expensive 
ones at that — instruments more intractable and less economical than tools of iron 
and fire. . . . Without being cruel, he can be completely indifferent to the suffer- 
ings of a class of men with whom he has no moral commerce, no sentiments in 
common. Douktless Madame de Sevigne was not an evil woman, . . . yet Madame 
de Sevigne, while detailing the atrocious punishments meted out to the people of 
Brittany who had rioted over a tax, Madame de Sevigne, the impassioned mother, 
speaks of hangings and of thrashings ... in a light, cavalier tone that betrays not 
the slightest sympathy. ... I doubt that, under the rule of the current laws of 
industry, there could be any more of a moral community between employers and 
their workers than there was, in the seventeenth century, between poor peasants 
and townsmen and a fine lady of the court." Eugene Buret, De la Misere des 
classes laborieuses en Angleterre et en France (Paris, 1840), vol. 2, pp. 269-271. 

[a5,l] 



"Many girls ... in the factories often leave the shop as early as six o'clock in the 
evening, instead of leaving at eight, and go roaming the streets in hopes of meeting 
some stranger whom they provoke with a sort of calculated hashf ulness. — In the 
factories, they call this doing one's fifth quarter of the day." Villerme, Tableau de 
Vetat physique et moral des ouvriers, vol. 1 , p. 226, cited in E . Buret, De Im Misere 
des classes laborieuses (Paris, 1840), vol. 1, p. 415. [a5,2] 

The principles of philanthropy receive a classic formulation in Buret: "Humanity, 
and indeed decency, do not permit us to allow human beings to die like animals. 
One cannot refuse the charitable gift of a coffin." Eugene Buret, De la Misere des 
classes laborieuses (Paris, 1840), vol. 1, p. 266. [a5,3] 



"The Convention, organ of the sovereign people, aims to make mendicancy and 
poverty disappear at a single stroke. ... It guarantees work for all citizens who 
need it. . . . Unfortunately, the section of the law that was designed specificaJly to 
deal with mendicancy as a crime was more easily enforced than that which prom- 
ised the benefits of national generosity to the poor. Repressive measures were 
taken, and they have remained within the letter as well as the spirit of the law, 
whereas the system of charity that motivated and justified these measures has 
never existed, except in the decrees of the Convention!" E. Buret, De la Misere des 
classes laborieuses (Paris, 1840), vol. 1 , pp. 222-224. Napoleon adopted the posi- 
tion described here with his law of July 5, 1808; the law of the convention dates 
from October 15, 1793. Those convicted three times of begging could expect depor- 
tation for eight years to Madagascar. [a5,4] 

Hippolyte Passy, ex-minister, in a letter addressed to the temperance society of 
Amiens (see he Temps, February 20, 1836): "One is led to recognize that, however 
meager the share of the poor might be, it is the art of applying that share to his real 
needs, it is the capacity to encompass the future in his thoughts, that the poor man 
lacks. His plight is due more to this lack than to any other." Cited in E. Buret, De 
la Misere des classes laborieuses (Paris, 1840), vol. 1, p. 78. [a5a,l] 

"There was a time, and it was not so long ago, when — all the while effusively 
singing the praises of work — one never let on to the worker that the means by 
which he derived his subsistence was not his freely willed labors but, in fact, a tax 
levied on him by certain persons who fattened themselves by the sweat of his 
brow. ... It is what is called the exploitation of man by man. Something of this 
sinister and deceptive doctrine has remained in the songs of the street. . . . Work is 
still spoken of with respect, but this respect has something forced about it, some- 
thing of a grimace. ... It is nevertheless true that tliis way of viewing work is an 
exception. More often, it is praised like a law of nature, a pleasure, or a benefit . . . 

Against the lazy let us always do battle — 

Great enemies of our society. 

For if they complain of sleeping on straw, 

It is only what they deserve. 

In our stockyards, our factories, our mills, 

Let us answer the call at day's dawning; 

While we work our prodigious machines, 

Let us hymn a fraternal refrain ..." 

— Antoine Reiny 

Charles Nisard, Des Chansons populaires (Paris, 1867), vol. 2, pp. 265-267. 

[a5a,2] 

"The fifteen years of the Restoration had been years of great agricultural and 
industrial prosperity. ... If we leave aside Paris and the large cities, we see that 
the institution of the press, along with the various electoral systems, engaged only 
part of the nation, and the least numerous part: the bourgeoisie. Many in this 



bourgeoisie were already fearful of a revolution." A. Malet and P. GriJJet, XIX" 
Siecle (Paris, 1919), p. 72. [a5a,3] 



"The crisis of 1857-1858 . . . marked a sudden end to all the illusions of imperial 
socialism. All efforts to maintain wages at a level that would have corresponded in 
some degree to the ever-rising prices of food and housing proved futile." 
D. Rjazanov, Zur Geschichte der ersten Internationale, in Marx-Engels Archiv, 
vol. 1 [Frankfurt am Main < 1928 > ] , p. 145. [a5a,4] 

"In Lyons, the economic crisis had caused a reduction in the salary of the silk 
weavers — the famous canuts — to eighteen sous for a workday of fifteen to sixteen 
hours. The prefect had tried to induce the workers and bosses to agree to establish 
a minimum salary level. The attempt having failed, an insurrection broke out on 
November 12, 1831; it was nonpolitical in character, representing an uprising of 
the poor. 1 Live Working or Die Fighting' read the black banner which the canuts 
carried before them. . . . After two days of fighting, 5 the troops of the line, which 
the Garde Nationale had refused to support, were forced to evacuate Lyons. The 
workers laid down their arms. Casimir Perier sent an army of 36,000 men to 
reoccupy the city; furthermore, he removed the prefect from offi ce, annulled the 
tariff which the latter had succeeded in foisting upon the bosses, and disbanded 
the Garde Nationale (December 3, 1831). . . . Two years later, . . . charges brought 
against an association of Lyons workers, the Mutualists, were the occasion for an 
uprising that lasted live days." A. Malet and P. Grillet, XIX- Siecle (Paris, 1919), 
pp. 86-88. [a6,l] 

"A study of working conditions in the textile industry in 1840 revealed that, for 
one fifteen-and-a-half-hour day of active work, the average salary was less than 
two francs for men and barely one franc for women. The suffering . . . got worse, 
especially beginning in 1834, because, civil unrest being finally quelled, industrial 
enterprises multiplied so rapidly that, within ten years, the population of the cities 
increased by two million solely through the influx of peasants to the factories." 
A. Malet and P. Grillet, XIX" Siecle (Paris, 1919), p. 103. [a6,2] 

"In 1830, many believed that Catholicism in France was on its deathbed and that 
the political role of the clergy was finished for good. . . . Yet ... on February 24, 
1848, the insurgents who commenced the sacking of the Tuileries removed their 
hats in front of the Crucifix taken from the chapel and escorted it all the way to the 
Eglise Saint-Roch. With the proclamation of the Republic, universal suffrage sent 
to the National Assembly . . . three bishops and twelve priests. . . . This could 
happen because, during the reign of Louis Philippe, the clergy had gotten closer to 
the people." A. Malet and P. Grillet, XIX' Siecle (Paris, 1919), pp. 106, 107. 

[a6,3] 

On December 8, 1831, the precapitalist Journal des debuts takes a stand on the 
Lyons insurrection. "The article in he Journal des debuts produced a great sensa- 



tion. The enemy of the workers had brought into clear relief the international 
significance of the Lyons symptom. Neither the republican nor the legitimist press, 
however, wished to present the question in such dangerous terms. . . . The legiti- 
mists . . . protested for purely demagogic reasons, since at that moment it was the 
intention of this party to play the working class off against the liberal bourgeoisie 
in the interests of reestablishing the elder line of Bourbons; the republicans, on the 
other hand, had an interest in playing down, as far as possible, the purely prole- 
tarian cast of the movement ... in order . . . not to lose the working class as a 
future ally in the struggle against the July monarchy. Nevertheless, the immediate 
impression produced by the Lyons uprising was so wholly incommensurable, so 
painful for contemporaries, that for this reason alone it has already attained a 
special place in history. The generation which had witnessed the July Revolution 
. . . was thought, in effect, to have nerves of steel. Yet they saw in the Lyons 
insurrection something entirely new . . . , which alarmed them all the more insofar 
as the workers of Lyons themselves seemed manifestly not to see or understand this 
new dimension." E. Tarle, "Der Lyoner Arbeiteraufstand," in Marx-Engels Ar- 
chiv, ed. D. Rjazanov, vol. 2 (Frankfurt am Main, 1928), p. 102. [a6a,l] 



Tarle cites a passage from Borne on the Lyons insurrection, in which this writer 
vents his indignation over Casimir Perier because, as Tarle writes, "Perier re- 
joices at the lack of political motive for the uprising in Lyons, satisfied that this is 
only a war of the poor against the rich." The passage — in Ludwig Borne, Gesam- 
melte Schriften (Hamburg and Frankfurt am Main, 1862), vol. 10, p. 20 — runs: 
"It is said to be nothing more than a war of the poor against the rich, of those who 
have nothing to lose against those who own something! And this terrible truth 
which, hecause it is a truth, ought to have heen buried in the deepest of wells, t he 
lunatic raises aloft and Haunts before all the world!" In E. Tarle, "Der Lyoner 
Arbeiteraufstand," in Marx-Engels Archiv, vol. 2 (Frankfurt am Main, 1928), 
p. 112. [a6a,2] 



Buret was a student of Sismondi. Charles Andler credits him with an influence on 
Marx (Andler, Le Manifeste communiste [Paris, 1901]) — something which Meh- 
ring ("Ein methodologisches Problem," Die neue Zeit [Stuttgart], 20, no. 1, 
pp. 450-451) firmly denies. [a6a,3] 



Influence of Romanticism on political phraseology, explaining an attack on the 
congregations. "We are at the heginning of Romanticism, and we clearly recognize 
it by the manner in which it dramatizes everything. A cross was set up atop Mount 
Valerien: this cross ... is denounced as symbolizing the ascendancy of religious 
society over civil society. The Jesuit novitiate refers to itself only as 'the den of 
Montrouge.' A jubilee is announced for 1826, and already men of the cloth are 
thought to be looming on all sides." Pierre de la Gorce, La Restauration (Paris 
<1926-1928>),vol. 2, CharlesX, p. 57. [a7,l] 



We arc nothing but machines. 
Our Babels mount to the sky. 



Refrain: Let us love and, when we can, 

Let us meet to drink a round, 

Let the cannon fall silent or erupt — 

We drink, we drink, we drink 

To the independence of the world! 

Pierre Dupont, Le Chant des ouvriers (Paris, 1848). [a?,2] 

Last verse and refrain: 

If, in truth, a despicable mob, 
Having lire and iron in its store, 
Wants to shackle the body and soul 
Of the people, true child of God, 
Reveal to these depraved, 
O Republic, by foiling their plots, 
Your great Medusa face 
Ringed by red lightning! 



O tutelary Republic, 
•o not ascend to the skies, 
Ideal incarnated here on earth 
By universal suffrage. 

From the fourth verse: 

Ah! Let no nocturnal surprise 
Break in on the polls! 
Stand guard round the ballot box: 
'Tis the arch of our destiny. 

Pierre Dupont, Le Chant du vote (Paris, 1850). [a7,3] 

In chapters like "Le Vrai Sublime," "Le Fils de Dieu," "Le Sublime des sublimes," 
"Le Marchand de vins," "Le Chansonnier des sublimes," Poulot treats of types 
intermediate between worker and apache. The book is reformist; first published 
in 1869. Denis Poulot, Question sociale: "Le Sublime" new ed. (Paris). [a7,4] 

A proposal from Louis Napoleon's Extinction du pauperisme (p. 123), cited in 
Henry Fougere, Les Delegations ouvrieres aux expositions universelles sous le 
Second Empire (Montlu^on, 1905), p. 23: "All managers of factories or farms, all 
entrepreneurs of any kind, would be obliged by law, as soon as they had employed 
more than ten workers, to have an arbitrator who would govern their affairs, and 
to whom they would pay a salary double that of the simple workers." [a7a,l] 

"This people, victorious, who strode barefoot upon gold / Strewn across their path, 
and did not succumb" (Hegesippe Moreau). Motto of the newspaper UAimable 



Faubourien: Journal de I* cmnuille, cited in Curiosites revolutionnaires: Les 
Journaux rouges, by a Girondist (Paris, 1848), p. 26. [a7a,2] ___ 

Theory of A. Granier de Cassagnac, Histoire des classes ouvrieres et des classes q 5 

G. 

bourgeoises (Paris, 1838): the proletarians were descended from thieves and pros- el 
titutes. [a7a,3] S 

"Believe me, the wine of the barrieres has preserved the governmental framework 8 
from many a shock." Edouard Foucaud, Paris inventeur: Physiologie de Vindus- 
triefranqaise (Paris, 1844), p. I t. [a7a,4] 

Charras, from the Ecole Polytechnique, with reference to General Lobau, who 
had not wished to sign a proclamation: '"I will have him shot.' — 'What are you 
thinking of?' demanded M. Mauguin, incensed. 'Have General Lobau shot! A 
member of the Provisional Government!' — 'The very same,' responded the stu- 
dent, while leading the deputy to the window and showing him a hundred men 
outside, veterans of the lighting at the barracks in the Babylone district. 6 'And 
were I to order these brave men to shoot the Lord God, they would do it!"' 
G. Pinet, Histoire de VEcole polytechnique (Paris, 1887), p. 158 [evidently a lit- 
eral citation from Louis Blanc]. [a7a,5] 

Leon Guillemin: "There are two sorts of providence, . , . God and the Ecole 
Polytechnique. If one should be found wanting, the other will be there." In 
G. Pinet, p. 161. [a7a,6] 

Lamennais and Proudhon wanted to be buried in a mass grave (Delvau, Heures 
parisiennes <Paris, 1866>,pp. 50-51). [a7a,7] 

Scene from the February Revolution. The Tuileries were plundered. "Neverthe- 
less, the crowd had stopped, as a sign of respect, in front of the chapel. A student 
took advantage of this moment to steal the sacred vessels, and in the evening he 
had them taken to the Eglise Saint-Roch. He chose to carry, hy himself, the mag- 
nificent sculpted Christ that found a place on the altar; a group of people followed 
quietly in his steps, their hats removed and heads bowed. This scene . . . was 
reproduced on a stamp that could he seen, for a long time afterward, in the 
windows of all the merchants who sell religious icons. The Polytechnician was 
represented holding the Christ in his arms, displaying it before a kneeling crowd, 
while he exclaimed: 'Here is the master of us all!' These words were not actually 
spoken, but they conform to the sentiments of the population at a time when . . . 
the clergy itself, persecuted hy the Voltairean king, greeted the revolution with 
enthusiasm." G. Pinet, Histoire de VEcole polytechnique (Paris, 1887), pp. 245- 
246. [a8,l] 



The Polytechnicians "observed the proceedings of the Blanquist club thai: met in a 
hall on the ground floor, where demagogic orators, agitating for the most sinister of 



incendiary deeds, spoke already of putting the Provisional Government on trial." 
G. Pinet, Histoire de VEcole polytechnique (Paris, 1887), p. 250. [a8,2] 



During the February Revolution, students from the Ecole Poly technique burned 
papers in the Tuileries which appeared to them compromising for the signatories, 
but which would have had great interest for the revolution: declarations of loy- 
alty to Louis Philippe (Pinet, p. 254). [a8,3] 

Lissagaray, in an essay on Les Miserables, in La Bataille: "One need only be in 
touch with the people to become revolutionary" [Victor Hugo devmnt Vopinion 
(Paris, 1885), p. 129]. [a8,4] 

"Around 1840, a certain number of workers formed the resolution to plead their 
cause directly before the public. . . . From that moment, . . . communism, which 
until then had been on the offensive, took prudently to the defense." A. Corbon, 
he Secret du peuple de Paris (Paris, 1863), p. 117. In question are the communist 
organ La Fratemite, which began publishing already in 184.5, the anticommunist 
L' 'Atelier, L'Union, and La Ruche populaire, wluch was the earliest. [a8,5] 

On the worker: "He is, in general, incapahle of understanding practical affairs. 
The solutions that suit him best are therefore those which seem likely to exempt 
him from incessant preoccupation with what he considers the humble sphere, the 
drudgeries of life. . . . Let us take as a virtual certainty, then, that any system 
which would tend to rivet . . . our worker ... to the factory — though it promise far 
more butter than hread — . . . would he repugnant to him." A. Corbon, pp. 186- 
187. [a8,6] 

"The question of workers, like the question of the poor, was planted at the entry- 
way to the Revolution. Since the children of the families of workers and artisans 
could not cover the needs of a lahor-starved industry, factories made use of or- 
phans as well. . . . The industrial exploitation of children and women ... is one of 
the most glorious achievements of philanthropy. Cheap food for workers, with a 
. . . view to lowering wages, was likewise one of the favorite philanthropic notions 
of the factory owners and pobtical economists of the eighteenth century. . . . When 
the French finally study the Revolution with a cold eye and without class preju- 
dice, they will realize that the ideas which made for its greatness came from Swit- 
zerland, where the bourgeoisie was already dominant: in fact, it was from Geneva 
that A. P. Candolle imported the so-called 'economic soup' . . . which created such 
a furor in the Paris of the Revolution. . . . Even the dry and unblinking Volney 
could not help being moved 'at the sight of this alliance of men of respectahle 
position eagerly occupied in supervising a pot of hoiling soup.'" Paul Laf argue, 
"Die christliche Liebestatigkeit," Die neue Zeit, 23, no. 1 (Stuttgart), pp. 148-149. 

[a8a,l] 



"Should three men happen to be in the street talking together about wages, or 
should they happen to ask the entrepreneur who has grown rich on their labor for 



a raise of one sou, then the bourgeois becomes terrified and cries out for strong 
measures. . . . Most of the time, our governments have exploited this sad progress 
of fear. . . . All I can say here is that . . . our grand Terrorists were by no means 
men of the people. They were bourgeois and nobles, men with cultivated, subtle, 
bizarre minds — sophists and scholastics." J. Michelet, he Peuple (Paris, 1846), 
pp. 153-154. 7 [a8a,2] 



Fregier, the author of Les Classes danger euses, was head clerk at the prefecture of 
police. [a8a,3] 

On the description of the February Revolution in Flaubert's Education sentimen- 
tale — which needs to be reread — one finds (with reference to Stendhal's descrip- 
tion of the Battle of Waterloo): 8 "Nothing of the general movements, nothing of 
the great clashes, but rather a succession of details which can never form a whole. 
This is the model which M. Flaubert has imitated in his depiction of the events of 
February and June 1848; it is a model of description from the standpoint of the 
idler, and of politics from the standpoint of the nihilist." J. J. Nescio, La Litter ■ attar e 
sous les deux Empires, 1804-1852 (Paris, 1874), <p. 114>. [a8a,4] 



Scene from the July Revolution. A woman donned men's clothing to fight alongside 
the others, and then afterward, as woman again, nursed the wounded who were 
lodged in the Stock Exchange. "Saturday evening, the cannoneers who were trans- 
ferring the artillery pieces remaining at the Bourse to the Hotel de Ville enthroned 
our young heroine on a cannon crowned with laurels and brought her with them. 
This evening, at around ten o'clock, they brought her back in triumph to the 
bourse by the light of torches; she was seated on an armchair decorated with 
garlands and laurels." C. F. Tricotel, Esquisse de quelques scenes de Vinterieurde 
Im Bourse pendant les jownees des 28, 29, 30 et 31 juillet dernier: Au profit des 
blesses (Paris, 1830), p. 9. [a9,l] 

Lacenaire composed an "Ode a la guillotine," in which the criminal is celebrated 
in the allegorical figure of a woman, of whom it is said: "This woman laughed 
with horrible glee, / As a crowd tearing down a throne will laugh." The ode was 
written shortly before Lacenaire's execution — that is, in January 1836. Alfred 
Delvau, Les Lions du jour (Paris, 1867), p. 87. [a9,2] 



A charity supper at the Hotel de Ville, where unemployed workers — in winter, 
above all construction workers — gathered. "The hour for the public meal has just 
sounded. And now Little Bluecoat hands his ivory-tipped cane to one of his assis- 
tants, takes from his buttonhole a silver place-setting which is attached there, dips 
the spoon into one pot after another, tastes, pays the servers, presses the out- 
stretched hands of the poor, takes up his cane, refastens his spoon, and goes 
tranquilly on his way. . . . He is gone. The serving of the food begins." Little 
Bluecoat was the nickname of the philanthropist Edme Champion, who had risen 
out of very modest circumstances. <See al2a,l.> The passage from Ch.-L. 



Chassin, La Legende du Petit Manteau Bleu, cited in AJfred Delvau, Les Lions du 
jour (Paris, 1867), p. 283. [a9,3] 



The author, in his pamphlet condemning the rural exodus, turns to the country 
girl: "Poor, lovely child! The journeyman's tour de France, which is of question- 
able utility to your brothers, is always an evil for you. Do not — if need be, until 
you are forty — let go of your mother's apron strings . . .; and should you be foolish 
enough to set out on your own, and should you find yourself sharing your unfur- 
nished room with intransigent unemployment and hunger, then call (like a virgin I 
knew once), call a last guest to your side: CHtLERA. At least in his fleshless arms, at 
least on his ghastly chest, you will no longer fear for your honor." And immedi- 
ately following this passage: "You men of conscience who will read this, I implore 
you once more, on my hands and knees, to make known, in every way possible, the 
substance of this penultimate chapter." Emile Crozat, La Maladie du siecle, ou 
Les Suites funestes du declassement social: Ouvrage ecrit sous les tristes inspira- 
tions d'un avocat sans cause, d'un notaire et d'un avoue sans clientele, d'un 
medecin sans pratiques, d'un negociant sans capitaux, d'un ouvrier sans travail 
(Bordeaux, 1856), p. 28. [a9,4] 

Insurrectionist movements under Louis Philippe: "It was then, in 1832, that the 
red Hag appeared for the first time." Charles Seignohos, Histoire sincere de la 
nation franqaise (Paris, 1933), p. 418. [a9a,l] 

"In 1848, there were only four cities with a population above a hundred thousand 
souls — Lyons, Marseilles, Bordeaux, and Rouen; and only three with a population 
of seventy-five thousand to a hundred thousand — Nantes, Toulouse, and Lille. 
Paris alone was a great metropolis with more than a million inhabitants, not count- 
ing the faubourgs (annexed in 1860). France remained a country of small towns." 
Charles Seignobos, Histoire sincere de la nation franqaise (Paris, 1933), pp. 396- 
397. [a9a,2] 

In 1840, the petty bourgeoisie makes a push toward the right to vote, by demand- 
ing it for the Garde Nationale. [a9a,3] 

National Assembly of 1848. "Mile. asks to borrow 600 francs from the Na- 
tional Assembly to pay her rent." Historical fact. Paris sous la Republique de 
1848: Exposition de la Bibliotheque et des Travaux historiques de la Ville de Paris 
(1909), p. 41. [a9a,4] 

"As soon as they heard tell of a battalion of women, the designers set about to find 
them a uniform. . . . Eugenie Niboyet, editor of La Voix des femmes, . . . pro- 
nounced on the matter: 'The title "Vesuvian,"' she writes, 'means that every one 
of these conscripts is harboring, in the core of her heart, a volcano of revolution- 
ary fires.' . . . Eugenie Niboyet then summoned her 'sisters' to the downstairs 
galleries of the Bonne-Nouvelle bazaar and to the Salle Taranne." Paris sous la 



Republique de 1848: Exposition de la Bibliotheque et des Travaux historiques de 



Social subjects occupy a very large place in lyric poetry at midcentury. They take 
all possible forms, from the innocuous variety of a Charles Coknance ("La 
Chanson des locataires" <The Tenants' Song>, "La Chanson des imprimeurs" 
<"The Printers' Song>) to the revolutionary lyrics of a Pierre Dupont. Inventions 
are a favorite theme of such chansons, and their social significance is underscored. 
Thus was born a "poem in praise of the prudent entrepreneur who first re- 
nounced the manufacture of a noxious product [white lead] to adopt 'the white of 
innocent zinc.'" Paris sous la Republique de 1848: Exposition de la Ville de Park 



Apropos of Cabet: "It is toward the end of 1848 that the discovery of the deposits 
became known in Paris, and almost immediately companies were formed to facili- 
tate the emigration of prospectors. By May 1849, fifteen such companies had 
begun to operate. The 'Compagnie Parisienne' had the honor of transporting the 
first group of travelers, and . . . these modern Argonauts entrusted themselves to a 
blind Jason who had never even seen California: one Jacques Arago, . . . whose 
account ... of a voyage round the world was in part developed from another's 
notes. . . . Newspapers were founded: La Calif ornie, a general-interest paper on 
the Pacific Ocean; the 'gold-bearing' Aurifere, monitor of the gold mines; L'Echo 
du Sacramento. Joint-stock companies offered shares of stock at exceptionally low 
prices, only five francs, on the floor of all the stock exchanges." Many cocottes 
make the trip overseas — the colonists are experiencing a shortage of women. Paris 
sous la. Republique de 1848: Exposition de la Ville de Paris (1909), p. 32. <On 
Jacques Arago, see al2,5.> [al0,l] 

There's a comparison to be drawn between Cabet and the following verse, which 
is, of course, directed against the Saint-Simonians. It comes from .Alcide Genty, A 
Monsieur de Chateaubriand: Poetes et prosateurs francais — Satire (Paris, 1838), cited 
in Carl Lodewijk de Liefde, Le Saint-Simonisme dans la poesie jrancaue entre 1825 
et 1865 <Haarlem, 1927>, p. 171: "The insinuating Rodrigues will peddle to the 
Iroquois / Bareme and some unsmoked cigarettes." [al0,2] 

Delphine Gay (Mme. E. de Girardin) shows herself, in her poem "Les Ouvriers 
de Lyons" [Poesies completes [Paris, 1856], p. 210), to be a precursor of the philoso- 
phy of innkeeping: "The poor man is happy when the rich has his fun." [al0,3] 



With two arms of iron a magnificent track 

Will begird my republic: Peking to Paris. 

A hundred different peoples, mixing their tongues, 

Will make one colossal car a Babel. 

There, with wheel of fire, humanity's coach 

Will wear to the hone the muscles of the earth. 

From atop this gleaming vessel, men, all amazed, 



la Ville de Paris (1909), p. 28. 



[a9a,5] 



(1909), p. 44. 



[a9a,6] 




Will look out on an ocean of eatables. 

The world will hccomc a fine china howl 

Filled up f«r this human menagerie; 

And the clean-shaven glohe, without beard or hair — 

A monumental pumpkin — will revolve through the skies. 



Alfred de Musset, Namouna (Paris), p. 113 ("Dupontct Durand"). 



[al0,4] 



Saint-Simonian poetry — Savinien Lapointe, shoemaker, "L'Emeute" <The 



INo, the future will dispense with barricades! 

You great ones, while your hands arc huilding scaffolds, 
Mine are scattering flowers over the graves. 
To each his mission or his painful task: 
To the poet, the song; to power, the ax! 



Olinde Rodrigues, Poesies societies des ouvriers (Paris, 1841), pp. 237, 239. 

[al0,5] 

From Alfred de Vigny, "La Maison du berger" <The Shepherd's House> , treating 
of the railroad: 



May God guide the thundering steam to its end 
'Cross the mountains traversed hy iron rails. 
Let an angel he perched on its loud-clanking hoiler 
When it heads underground or rocks bridges. 



Turn away from these tracks — they lack grace. 

Their iron lines will take y»u 

With the speed of an arrow through space, 

Shot whistling from how to bull's-eye. 

Thus hurled like a holt, human beings 

Lose their breath, lose their sight, 

In the smothering cloud rent by lightning. 



Bistancc and time arc now conquered by Science, 
Which encircles the world with its road sad and straight. 
The World is reduced by our experiment; 
The equator is now but a tight-fitting hoop. 



Alfred de Vigny, Poesies completes, new edition (Paris, 1866), pp. 218, 220-221. 

[al0a,l] 

To be compared with Cabet: the remarkable, beautiful poem "Le Havre," by 
Elise Meury, embroiderer (•linde Rodrigues, Poesies socinles des ouvriers [Paris, 
1841], p. 9). It describes an ocean steamer, contrasting the luxury cabins with the 
lower deck. [al#a,2] 



Riot>: 



Rue Transnonmn, le 15 avril 1834 (Government Reprisal on the Rue Transnonain, April 
15, 1834). Lithograph by Honore Daumier. See ala,l; al0a,5. 



"An opuscule in verse (Les Principes du Petit Manteau Bleu stir le systeme de la 
communaute <see a9,3>, by Loreux, communist [Paris, 1847]) is a species of 
dialogue between a partisan and an adversary of communism. ... In order to 
alleviate all . . . suffering, the communist Loreux appeals not to envy or to venge- 
ance, but to kindness and generosity." Jean Skerlitch, L'Opinion publique en 
France d'upres la poesie politique et sociale de 1830 a 1848 (Lausanne, 1901), 



August 1834, uprising of Mntualists in Lyons, nearly contemporaneous with the 
uprising on the Rue Transnonain. <J At Lyons: "The army reported 115 men killed 
and 360 wounded, and the workers reported 200 killed and 400 wounded. The 
government wanted to grant indemnities, and a commission was named, which 
proclaimed the following principle: 'The government does not want the triumph of 
the social order to cost any tears or regrets. It knows that time, which gradually 
effaces the anguish occasioned by the costliest personal losses, is powerless to 
redress the blows of fortune. ' . . . The whole morality of the July Monarchy can be 
found in these words." Jean Skerlitch, L'Opinion publique en France d'apres la 
poesie politique et sociale (Lausanne, 1901), p. 72. [al0a,5] 



p. 194. 



[al0a,3] 



In 1847, a famine; many poems on the subject. 



[a!0a,4] 



"I will rouse the people with my unvarnished truths; / I will prophesy on every 
street corner." Hegesippe Moreau, cited in Jean Skerlitch, L'Opinion publique en 
France d'apres la poesie politique et sociale de 1830 a 1848, p. 85. [all,l] 

"In the days immediately following the Revolution of 1830, a song made the rounds 
in Paris: 'Requete d'un ouvrier a un Juste-Milieu.' Its refrain was particularly 
expressive: 

I am hungry! 
Well, then, eat your list. 
Save the other for tomorrow. 

And that's my refrain. 

. . . Barthelemy . . . says . . . that . . . the unemployed lahorer has no choice hut to 
work in 'the yard of upheaval.' ... In Barthelemy's Nemesis . . . the pontif Roth- 
schild, with a multitude of the faithful, chants the 'Mass of stockjobbing,' sings the 
'psalm of annuity.'" Jean Skerlitch, L'Opinion publique en France d'apres la 
poesie (Lausanne, 1901), pp. 97-98, 159. [all,2] 



"During the day of June 6, a search of the sewers had been ordered. It was feared 
that they would be used as a refuge by the vanquished. Prefect Gisquet was to 
ransack the hidden Paris, while General Bugeand was sweeping the public Paris — 
a connected double operation which demanded a double strategy on the part of 
public power, represented ahove by the army and below by the police. Three 
platoons of officers and sewermen investigated the subterranean streets of Paris." 
Victor Hugo, Oeuvres completes, novels, vol. 9 (Paris, 1881), p. 196 (Les 
Miser ables). [u [all,3] 

Unfolding its wings of gold, 
Million-armed industry, exultant, 
Traverses our domains 
And seeds the fields. 

The desert is peopled at the sound of its voice, 

The arid soil teems — 

And for the world's bounty 

It gives the world laws. <p. 205 > 

Refrain: All honor to us, the offspring of industry! 
Honor, honor to our works! 
In all the arts we have conquered our rivals — 
And would be the hope, the pride, of our country. <p. 204> 

Cinquante Chants francais, lyrics by various authors; set to music, with piano 
accompaniment, by Rouget de Lisle (Paris, 1825) [Bihliotheque Nationale, 
Vm7.4454], p. 202 (no. 49, "Chant des industriels," 1821, text hy de Lisle). In the 
same volume, no. 23, "La Marseillaise." [all,4] 



Revolutionary tactics and battles on the barricades, according to Les Miserables. 
The night hefore the harricade lighting: "The invisible police of the emeute 



watched everywhere, and maintained order — that is, night. . . . The eye which 
might have looked from above into that mass of shadow would have caught a 
glimpse in the distance here and there, perhaps, of indistinct lights, bringing out 
broken and fantastic lines, outlines of singular constructions, something like 
ghostly gleams coming and going among ruins; these were the barricades." Oeu- 
vres completes, novels, vol. 8 (Paris, 1881), pp. 522-523. — The following passage 
is from the chapter "Faits d'ou 1'histoire sort et que l'histoire ignore." "The meet- 
ings were sometimes periodic. At some, there were never more than eight or ten, 
and always the same persons. In others, anybody who chose to entered, and the 
room was so full that they were forced to stand. Some were there from enthusiasm 
and passion; others because 'it was on their way to work.' As in the time of the 
Revolution, there were in these wine shops some female patriots, who embraced 
the newcomers. Other expressive facts came to light. A man entered a shop, drank, 
and went out, saying: 'Wine merchant, whatever 1 owe, the revolution will pay.' 
... A worker, drinking with a comrade, made him put his hand on him to see how 
warm he was; the other felt a pistol under his vest. . . . All this fermentation was 
puhlic, we might almost say tranquil. . . . No singularity was wanting in this cri- 
sis — still subterranean, but already perceptible. Bourgeois talked quietly with 
workers about the preparations. They would say, 'How is the uprising coming 
along?' in the same tone in which they would have said, 'How is your wife?'" Vic- 
tor Hugo, Oeuvres completes, novels, vol. 8 (Paris, 1881), pp. 43, 50-51 (Les 
Miser aides). 11 [alla,l] 



Barricade fighting in Les Miserables. From the chapter "Originalite de Paris." 
"Outside of the insurgent quartiers, nothing is usually more strangely calm than 
the physiognomy of Paris during an uprising. . . . There is firing at the streetcor- 
ners, in an arcade, in a cul-de-sac; . . . corpses litter the pavement. A few streets 
away, you can hear the clicking of hilliard halls in the cafes. . . . The carriages jog 
along; people are going out to dine. Sometimes in the very quartier where there is 
fighting. In 1831 a fusillade was suspended to let a wedding party pass hy. At the 
time of the insurrection of May 12, 1839, on the Rue Saint-Martin, a little infirm 
old man, drawing a handcart surmounted hy a tricolored rag, in which there were 
decanters filled with some liquid, went hack and forth from the harricade to the 
troops and from the troops to the barricade, impartially offering glasses of co- 
coa. . . . Nothing is more strange; and this is the peculiar characteristic of the 
uprisings of Paris, which is not found in any other capital. Two things are requisite 
for it: the greatness of Paris and its gaiety. It requires the city of Voltaire and of 
Napoleon." Victor Hugo, Oeuvres completes, novels, vol. 8 <Paris, 1881 >, 
pp. 429-43 1. 12 [alla,2] 

On the motif of exoticism, conjoined with that of emancipation: 

All the seraglios are opened, 
The imam finds his inspiration in wine, 
The Orient learns to read, 
Barrault crosses the seas. 



Jules Mercier, "L'Arche de Dieu," in Foi nouvelle: Chants et chansons de Bar- 
rault, Vincard . . . 1831 a 1834 (Paris, January 1, 1835), book 1, p. 28. [al2,l] 



Forge the liberty of the Orient: 
A cry of Woman, on the clay of deliverance, 
Travels from the harem by repeated echo 
To break the horrid silence of the West. 

Vincard, "Le Premier Depart pour l'Orient," in Foi nouvelle: Chants et chansons 
de Barrault, Vincard . . . 1831 a 1834 (Paris, January 1, 1835), book 1, p. 48. 

[al2,2] 



A strange stanza from "Le Depart," by Vincard: 

Cast of F from a universe of serfdom, 
The old swaddling clothes' 3 and the jargon; 
Learn the coarse and plain speech of the People, 
The light ditty and the oath. 

Foi nouvelle, 1831 a 1834 (Paris, January 1, 1835), pp. 89-90. [al2,3] 



Our flag has lost patience with the sky of France; 
Over the minarets of Egypt it now must wave. 

Then will they see us, workers adept, 

With our ribbons of iron 

Subduing the desert sands; 
Cities, like palms, will spring up everywhere. 

F. Maynard, "A l'Orient," in Foi nouvelle (Paris, January 1, 1835), pp. 85, 88. 

[al2,4] 



In Jacques Arago's pamphlet of 1848, "Auxjuges des insurges," deportation 
appears as an instrument of colonial expansion. After the author, in picturesque 
language, has summoned up in turn each of France's overseas possessions with- 
out finding a single one suited to be the land of deportation, his eye lights on 
Patagonia. He gives a very poetical description of the land and its inhabitants. 
"These men, the tallest on earth; these women, of whom the youngest are so 
alluring after an hour's swim; these antelopes, these birds, these fish, these phos- 
phorescent waters, this sky alive with clouds coursing to and fro like a flock of 
wandering hinds . . . — all this is Patagonia, all this a virgin land rich and inde- 
pendent. . . . Do you fear that England will come and tell you that you have no 
right to set foot on this part of the American continent? . . . Citizens, let England 
grumble, just let it, . . . and if it should arm, . . . then transport to Patagonia the 
men whom your laws have smitten. When the day of battle arrives, those you 
have exiled will have become staunch mobile barricades, standing implacable at 
die outposts." [al2,5] 



Edme Champion: self-made man, 14 philanthropist (1764—1852). "Whenever he 
had occasion to go across town, he would never forget to look into the morgue" — so 
reports Charles-Louis Chassin, La Legende du Petit Manteau Bleu (Paris, ca. 
1860), p. 15. Champion had been a goldsmith and, during the Revolution, pro- 
tected noble-horn former customers — which endangered his own life. [al2a,l] 

Balzac, in Eugenie Grandet, with reference to the miser's dreams of the future: 
"That future which once awaited us beyond the requiem has been transported 
into the present." 15 This is still more true with reference to poor people's fears of 
the future. [al2a,2] 

From an analysis of the situation around 1830, hy police prefect Gisquet. At issue 
are the workers: "Unlike the well-to-do classes of the bourgeoisie, they have no 
fear that, through a broader extension of liberal principles, they will be compro- 
mising an established fortune. . . . Just as the Third Estate profited from the sup- 
pression of the nobility's privileges . . . , the working class would profit today from 
all that the bourgeoisie would lose in its turn." Cited in Charles Benoist, 
"L'Homme de 1848," part 1, Revue des deux mondes (July 1, 1913), p. 138. 

[al2a,3] 

"The great mob and the holy rabble / Made a rush at immortality." From a revo- 
lutionary song around 1830. Cited in Charles Benoist, "L'Homme de 1848," 
part 1, Revue des deux mondes (July 1, 1913), p. 143. [al2a,4] 

Rumford, in his economic essays, assembled recipes designed to lower the cost of 
soup-kitchen fare by using substitute ingredients. "His soups are not too expen- 
sive, seeing that for 11 francs 16 centimes, one has enough to feed 115 persons 
twice a day. The only question is whether they are being properly fed." Charles 
Benoist, "De l'Apologie du travail a Tapotheose de l'ouvrier," Revue des deux 
mondes (January 15, 1913), p. 384. Charity soups were variously introduced by 
French industries at the time of the great Revolution. [al2a,5] 

1837 — the first banquets for universal suffrage and the petition with 240,000 sig- 
natures (equivalent to the number of registered voters at that time). [al2a,6] 

Around 1840, suicide is familiar in the mental world of the workers. "People are 
talking about copies of a lithograph representing the suicide of an English worker 
in despair at not being able to earn a Irving. At the house of Sue himself, a worker 
comes to commit suicide with this note in his hand: 'I am killin g myself out of 
despair. It seemed to me that death would be easier for me if I died under the roof 
of one who loves us and defends us.' The working-class author of a little book 
much read by other workers, the typographer Adolphe Boyer, also takes his own 
life in despair." Charles Benoist, "L'Homme de 1848," part 2, Revue des deux 
mondes (February 1, 1914), p. 667. [al2a,7] 



From Robert (du Var), Ilistoire de la classe ouvriere <depuis I'esclave jusqu'au 
proletairede nos jours> (1845-1848): "You have seen it witnessed in this history, 
0 worker! When, as slave, you embraced the gospel, you became, unhesitatingly, 
a serf; when, as serf, you embraced the eighteenth-century philosophes, you be- 
came a proletarian. Well, today you have taken up socialism. . . . What is to 
prevent you from becoming a partner? You are king, pope, and emperor — 
your fate, in this regard, is in your own hands." Cited in Charles Benoist, 
"L'Homme de 1848," part 2, Revue des deux mondes (February 1, 1914), p. 668. 

[al3,l] 

A comment by Tocqueville on the spirit of the 1840s: "Wealthy proprietors liked to 
recall that they had always been enemies of the bourgeois class and always been 
friends of the people. The bourgeoisie themselves recalled with a certain pride that 
their fathers had been lahorers, and if they could not trace their lineage ... to a 
worker . . . , they would at least contrive to descend from some uncouth person 
who had made his fortune on his own." Cited in Charles Benoist, "L'Homme de 
1848," part 2, Revue des deux mondes (February 1, 1914), p. 669. [al3,2] 

"The question of poverty . . . has, in a few years, passed through extremely varied 
phases. Toward the end of the Restoration, the debate turns entirely on the extinc- 
tion of mendicancy, and society tries less to alleviate poverty than to . . . forget it 
hy relegating it to the shadows. At the time of the July Revolution, the situation is 
reversed hy means of politics. The repuhlican party seizes on pauperism and 
transforms it into the proletariat. . . . The workers take up the pen. . . . Tailors, 
shoemakers, and typographers, who at that time constituted the revolutionary 
trades, march in the extreme avant-garde. . . . Around 1835, the debate is sus- 
pended in consequence of the numerous defeats dealt the repuhlican party. 
Around 1840, it resumes, . . . and bifurcates . . . into two schools, culminating, on 
the one hand, in communism and, on the other, in the associations deriving from 
the mutual interests of workers and employers." Charles Louandre, "Statistique 
litteraire: De la Production intellectuelle en France dupuis quinze ans," Revue des 
deux mondes (October 15, 1847), p. 279. [al3,3] 

The Blanquist Tridon: "O Might, queen of the barricades, . . . you who fl ash in the 
lightning and the riot, ... it is toward you that prisoners stretch their manacled 
hands." Cited in Charles Benoist, "Le 'My the' de la classe ouvriere," Revue des 
deux mondes (Marcb 1, 1914), p. 105. [al3,4] 

Against workhouses, and in favor of lowering the tax on the poor: F.-M.-L. 
Naville, De la Charite legale et specialement des maisons de travail et de la pro- 
scription de la mendicite, 2 volumes (Paris, 1836). [al3,5] 



A coinage of 1848: "God is a worker." 



[al3a,l] 



Charles Benoist claims to find in Corhon, Le Secret du peuple de Paris, the proud 
consciousness of numerical superiority over the other classes. Benoist, "Le 
'Mythe' de la classe ouvriere," Revue des deux mondes (March 1, 1914), p. 99. 

[al3a,2] 

Pamphlets from 1848 are dominated by the concept of organization. [al3a,3] 

"In 1867, it was possible to hold conferences in which 400 worker delegates, be- 
longing to 117 professions, . . . discussed . . . the organization of Chambers of 
jointly unionized workers .... Up until then, however, workers' unions had been 
very rare — though on the other side, allied with the bosses, there had been forty- 
two Chambers of unionized workers. . . . Prior to 1867, in the margins and in 
defiance of the law, there had been associations only of typographers (1839), mold- 
ers (1863), bookbinders (1864), and hatters (1865). After the meetings held in the 
Passage Raoul, . . . these syndicates multiplied." Charles Benoist, "Le 'Mythe' de 
la classe ouvriere," Revue des deux mondes (March 1, 1914), p. 111. [al3a,4] 

In 1848, Toussenel was a member of the Commission of Labor over which Louis 
Blanc presided in Luxembourg. [al3a,5] 

lb present London in its significance for Barbier and Gavarni. Gavarni's series 
Ce qu 'on voit gratis a Londres <What Can Be Seen for Free in London). [al3a,6] 

In Der achtzehnte Brumaire, Marx says of the cooperatives that in them the 
proletariat "renounces the revolutionizing of the old world by means of the latter's 
own great, combined resources, and seeks, rather, to achieve its salvation behind 
society's back, in private fashion, within its limited conditions of existence." 16 
Cited in E. Fuchs, Die Karikatur des europaischen Volker, vol. 2 <Munich, 1921 > , 
p. 472. [al3a,7] 

On Poesies sociales des ouvriers, edited by Rodrigues, La Revue des deux mondes 
writes: "You pass from a reminiscence of M. de Beranger to a coarse imitation of 
the rhythms of Lamartine and Victor Hugo" (p. 966). And the class-hound charac- 
ter of this critique emerges unabashedly when its author writes of the worker: "If 
he aims to reconcile the exercise of his profession with literary studies, he will 
discover how uncongenial to intellectual development physical exhaustion can be" 
(p. 969). In support of his point, the author rehearses the fate of a worker poet 
who was driven mad. Lerminier, "De la Litterature des ouvriers," Revue des deux 
mondes, 28 (Paris, 1841). [al3a,8] 

Agricol Perdiguier's Livre du compagnonnage seeks to make use of the medieval 
guild-forms of alliance hetween workers for the new form of association. This 
undertaking is curtly dismissed hy Lerminier in "De la Litterature des ouvriers," 
in Revue des deux mondes, 28 (Paris, 1841), pp. 955 ff. [al4,l] 



Adolphe Boyer, De VEtat des ouvriers et de son amelioration par I'organisation 
du travail (Paris, 1841). The author of this book was a printer. It was unsuccess- 
ful. He commits suicide and (according to Lerminier) calls on the workers to follow 
his example. The book was published in German in Strasbourg, in 1844. It was 
very moderate and sought to make use of compagnonnage for worker associa- 
tions. [al4,2] 

"Anyone who considers the harsh and burdensome life which the laboring 
classes have to lead remains convinced that, among the workers, the most re- 
markable men . . . are not those who hurry to take up a pen . . ., not those who 
write, but those who act. . . . The division of labor that assigns to some men 
acdon and to others thought is thus always in the nature of things." Lerminier, 
"De la Litterature des ouvriers," Revue des deux mondes, 28 (Paris, 1841), p. 975. 
And by "action" the author means, fir st of all, the practice of working overtime! 

[al4,3] 

Worker associations deposited their funds in savings banks or took out treasury 
bonds. Lerminier, in "De la Litterature des ouvriers" (Revue des deux mondes 
[Paris, 1841], p. 963), praises them for this. Their insurance institutions, he says 
further on, lighten the load of public assistance. [al4,4] 

Proudhon receives an invitation to dinner from the financier Millaud. "Proudhon 
managed to extricate himself ... by replying that he lived entirely in the bosom of 
his family and was always in bed hy nine P.M." Firmin Maillard, La Cite des 
intellectuels (Paris <1905>), p. 383. [al4,5] 

From a poem hy Dauheret on Ledru-Rollin: 

The red flag revered hy the French everywhere 
Is the rohe in which Christ was attired. 
Let us all render homage to brave Rohespierre, 
And Marat who made him admired. 

Cited in Auguste Lepage, Les Cafes politiques et litteraires de Paris (Paris <1874> , 
p. 11. [al4,6] 

Georg Herwegh, "Die Epigonen von 1830," Paris, November 1841: 

Away, away with the Tricolor, 
Which -witnessed the deeds of your fathers, 
And write on the gates as a warning: 
"Here is Freedom's Capua!" 

Georg Herwegh, Gedichte eines Lebendigen, vol. 2 (Zurich and Winterthur, 1844), 
p. 15. [al4a,l] 



Heine on the hourgeoisie during the February Revolution: "The severity with 
which the people dealt with . . . thieves who were caught in the act seemed to many 



. . . rather excessive, and certain people hecame uneasy on learning that thieves 
were shot on the spot. Under such a regime, they said to themselves, who could be 
sure of his own life in the end?" Heinrich Heine, "Die Fehruari'evolution," 
Scimtliche Werke, ed. Wilhelm Bblsche (Leipzig), vol. 5, p. 363." ' [al4a,2] 

America in the Hegelian philosophy: "Hegel . . . did not give direct expression to 
this consciousness of terminating an epoch of history; rather, he gave it indirect 
expression. He makes it known by the fact that, in thinking, he casts an eye over 
the past in 'its obsolescence of spirit,' even as he looks ahout for a possible discov- 
ery in the domain of spirit, all the while expressly reserving the awareness of such 
discovery. The rare indications concerning America — which at this period seemed 
the future land of liberty [note: A. Ruge, Aus friiherer Zeit, vol. 4, pp. 72-84. 
Fichte had already thought of emigrating to America at the time of the collapse of 
old Europe (letter to his wife of May 28, 1807).] — and concerning the Slavic world, 
envision the possibility, for universal spirit, of emigration from Europe as a means 
of preparing new protagonists of the principle of spirit that was . . . completed 
with Hegel. 'America is therefore the land of the future, where, in the ages that lie 
before us, the burden of the World's History shall reveal itself — perhaps in a 
contest hetween North and South America.' . . . But 'what has taken place in the 
New World up to the present time is only an echo of the Old World — the expression 
of a foreign Life; and as a Land of the Future, it has no interest for us here. ... In 
regard to Philosophy . . . we have to do with . . . that which is'" [Hegel, Philoso- 
phic der Geschichte, ed. Lasson, p. 200 (and 779?)]."' Karl Lowith, "L'Acheve- 
ment de la philosophie classique par Hegel et sa dissolution chez Marx et 
Kierkegaard" [Recherches philosophiques, founded by A. Koyrc, H.-Ch. Puech, 
A. Spaier, vol. 4 (Paris, 1934-1935), pp. 246-247]. [al4a,3] 

Auguste Barbier represented the doleful pendant to Saint-Simonian poetry. He 
disavows this relationship as little in his works in general as in these closing lines 
of his prologue: 

If my verse is too raw, its tongue too uncouth, 
Look to the brazen century in which it sounds. 
Cynicism of manners must defile the word, 
And a hatred of evil begets hyperbole. 
Thus, I can defy the gaze of the prude: 
My ungentle verse is true blue at heart. 

Auguste Barbier, Poesies (Paris, 1898), p. 4. (al5,l] 

Ganneau publishes "Waterloo" (Paris: Au Bureau des Publications Evadiennes, 
184 3) anonymously. The pamphlet is dedicated to the apotheosis of Napoleon — 
"Jesus the Christ-Ahel, Napoleon the Christ-Cain" (p. 8) — and concludes with the 
invocation of "Evadian Unity" (p. 15) and the signature: "In the name of the 
Grand Evadah, in the name of God on High, Mother and Father, . . . the Mapah" 
(p. 16). <SeeU12,7.> [al5,2] 



Ganneau's "Page prophetique" was published for the first time in 1840, and again 
during the Revolution of 1848. The title page of the second edition bears the 
following announcement: "This 'Prophetic Page,' seized on July 14, 1840, was 
discovered by citizen Sobrier, former deputy in the Police Department, in the 
dossier of citizen Ganneau (The Mapah). — (The official report is labeled: 'Revolu- 
tionary page, one of 3,500 copies distributed under carriage entrances.')" [al5,3] 

Ganneau's "Bapteme, mariage" inaugurates the era of the Evadah, commencing 
on August 15, 1838. The pamphlet is puhlished at 380 Rue Saint-Denis, Passage 
Lemoine. Signed: The Mapah. It proclaims: "Mary is no longer the Mother: she is 
the Bride; Jesus Christ is no longer the Son: he is the Bridegroom. The old world 
(of compression) is finished; the new world (of expansion) begins!" "Mary-Eve, 
female Genesiac unity" and "Christ-Adam, male Genesiac unity" appear "under 
the name Androgyne Evadam." [al5,4] 

"The 'Devoir Mutuel' of Lyons, which played a crucial role in the insurrections of 
1831 and 1834, marks the transition from the old Mutualite to the Resistance." 
Paul Louis, Histoire de la classe ouvriere en France de Im Revolution a nos jours 
(Paris, 1927), p. 72. [al5,5] 

On May 15, 1848, revolutionary demonstration of the Paris workers for the libera- 
tion of Poland. [al5,6] 

"Jesus Christ . . . , who gave us no vestige of a political code, left his work incom- 
plete." Honore de Balzac, he Cure de village (letter from Gerard to Grossetete), 
editions Siecle, vol. 17, p. 183. 19 [al5a,l] 

The early inquests into workers' circumstances were conducted, for the most part, 
by entrepreneurs, their agents, factory inspectors, and administrative officials. 
"When the doctors and philanthropists who were conducting the inquest went to 
visit the families of workers, they were generally accompanied by the entrepreneur 
or his representative. Le Play, for example, advises one, when visiting the families 
of workers, 'to utilize the recommendation of a carefully chosen authority.' He 
counsels the adoption of utmost diplomacy in regard to individual members of the 
family, and even the payment of small indemnities or the distribution of gifts: one 
should 'praise with discretion the sagacity of the men, the grace of the women, the 
good behavior of the children, and, in suitahle fashion, dispense little presents to 
all' (Les Ouvriers europeens [Paris], vol. 1, p. 223). In the course of the detailed 
critique of inquest procedures which Audiganne promotes in the discussions of his 
workers' circle, Le Play is spoken of in the following terms: 'Never was a falser 
path marked out, despite the best intentions. It is purely a question of the system. 
A mistaken point of view, an inadequate method of observation give rise to a 
wholly arbitrary train of thought having no relation at all to the reality of society 
and evincing, moreover, an incorrigible propensity for despotism and rigidity' 
(Audiganne, p. 61). A frequent error in the conduct of the inquests, according to 



Audiganne, is the air of ceremony with which the investigators carry out their 
visits to the homes of the workers: 'If not a single special inquest undertaken 
during the Second Empire yielded concrete results of any kind, the blame for this 
rests, in large part, on the pomp with which the investigators paraded around' 
(p. 93). Engels and Marx describe further the methods by which the workers were 
induced to express themselves on the occasion of these recherches societies and 
even to present petitions against the reduction of their work time." Hilde Weiss, 
"Die 'Enquete ouvriere' von Karl Marx" [Zeitschrift fiir Sozialforschung, ed. 
Max Horkheimer, 5, no. 1 (Paris, 1936), pp. 83-84]. The passages from Audi- 
ganne are taken from his book Memoires d'un ouvrier de Paris < Paris, 1873 > . 

[al5a,2] 

In 1854, the affair of the carpenters took place. When the carpenters of Paris 
decided to strike, proceedings were instituted against the leaders of the carpenters 
for violation of the ban on coalitions. They were defended, in the first instance and 
in the appeal, by Berryer. From his arguments before the court of appeals: "It 
cannot be this sacred resolve, this voluntary decision to abandon one's work 
rather than not derive a just income from it, that has been marked out for punish- 
ment by the law. No, it is the determination, instead, to restrain the freedom of 
others; it is the interdiction of work, the hindering of others from going to their 
place of work. ... In order, then, for there to be a coalition, in the proper sense, 
there must be some sort of restraint on the liberty of persons, a violence done to 
the freedom of others. And, in fact, if this is not the true construction of articles 
415 and 416, would there not be, in our law, a monstrous inequality between the 
condition of the workers and that of the entrepreneurs? The latter can take coun- 
sel together to decide that the cost of labor is too high. . . . The law . . . punishes 
the coalition of entrepreneurs only when their concerted action is unjust and 
abusive. . . . Without reproducing the same set of words, the law reproduces the 
same idea with respect to workers. It is by the sound interpretation of these arti- 
cles that you will consecrate the equality of condition that ought to exist between 
these two classes of individuals." <Pierre-Antoine> Berryer, Oeuvres: Plaidoyers, 
vol. 2, 1836-1856 (Paris, 1876), pp. 245-246. [al6,l] 

Affair of the carpenters: "M. Berryer concludes his plea by rising to considera- 
tions ... of the current situation, in France, of the lower classes — condemned, he 
says, to see two-fifths of their members dying in the hospital or laid out in the 
morgue." Berryer, Oeuvres: Plaidoyers, vol. 2, 1836-1856 (Paris, 1876), p. 250 
(The principals accused in the trial were sentenced to three years in prison — a 
judgment that was upheld on appeal.) [al6,2] 

"Our worker-poets of late have been imitating the rhythms of Lamartine, . . . too 
often sacrificing whatever folk originality they might have. . . . When they write, 
they wear a suit and put on gloves, thus losing the superiority that strong hands 
and powerful arms give to the people when they know how to use them." 
J. Michelet, he Peuple, 2nd ed. (Paris, 1846), p. 195. At another point (p. 107), 



the author accentuates the "peculiar character of meekness and melancholy" at- 
taching to this poetry. 2 " [al6,3] 



"In Paris . . . Engels jotted down the 'creed' wliich the local branch of the Commu- 
nist League had asked him to compose. He objected to the term 'creed,' by which 
Schapper and Moll had designated their draft, and he decided that the question- 
and-answer form which was usual in such programs, and to which Considerant 
and Cabet had ultimately had recourse as well, was no longer in place here." 
Gustav Mayer, Friedrich Engels, vol. 1 (Berlin <1933>), p. 283. 21 [al6,4] 

Legislative repression of the working class goes back to the French Revolution. 
At issue are laws which punished any assembling and unionizing on the part of 
workers, any collective demands for higher wages, and any strikes. ""Die law of 
June 17, 1791, and that of January 12, 1794, contain measures that have proved 
sufficient, up through the present, to repress these offenses." Chaptal, De I 'Indus- 
trie frangoise (Paris, 1819), vol. 2, p. 351. [al6a,l] 

"Since Marx was officially exiled from France, Engels decided, in August 1846, to 
shift his residence to the French capital so that he could meet with the German 
proletarians who were living there and recruit them for the cause of revolutionary 
communism. As it happened, however, the tailors and cahinetmakers and leather- 
workers whom Griin was trying to convert had nothing in common with the prole- 
tarian type on whom Engels was counting. . . . Paris was the headquarters of 
fashion and of the arts and crafts; most of the German workers who had come 
there to hetter their position in the trade, and then return home as master crafts- 
men, were still deeply imhued with the old spirit of the guild." Gustav Mayer, 
Friedrich Engels, vol. 1, Friedrich Engels in seiner Friihzeit, 2nd cd. (Berlin 



The Brussels "Communist Correspondence Committee" of Marx and Engels in 
1846: "'Marx and he . . . had tried in vain to convert Proudhon. Engels now under- 
took a fruitless mission to win over old Cahet, the leader of experimental Utopian 
communism on the continent, . . . for participation in the Correspondence Com- 
mittee. ... It was some months . . . hefore he established closer relations with the 
Reforme gronp, with Louis Blanc and particularly with <Ferdinand> Flocon." 
Gustav Mayer, Friedrich Engels, vol. 1, Friedrich Engels in seiner Friihzeit, 2nd 



Guizot writes, after the Fehruary Revolution: "I have long heen subject to a dou- 
hle suspicion: one, that the disease is much more serious than we think and say; 
and, two, that our remedies are futile, scarcely more than skin deep. While I held 
the reins of my country and directed its affairs, this douhle awareness grew 
stronger hy the day; and precisely in proportion as I succeeded and remained in 
power, I came to feel that neither my success nor my tenure in oflice was having 
much effect, that the defeated enemy was winning out over me, and that, in order 



<1933>),pp. 249-250. 22 



[al6a,2] 



ed. (Berlin <1933>), p. 254. 2i 



[al6a,3] 



truly to defeat him, one would have had to do things which it was impossible even 
to mention." Cited in Abel Bonnard, Les Moderes, in series entitled he Drame du 
present, vol. 1 (Paris < 1936>), pp. 314-315. [al6a,4] 



"If an agitator is to achieve lasting results, he must speak as the representative of 
a body of opinion. . . . Engels must have realized this during his fi rst visit to Paris. 
On his second, he found that the doors at which he knocked opened more easily. 
French socialism stiJJ refused to have anything to do with political struggles. 
Therefore, he could look for allies in the coming battle only among those demo- 
crats connected with La Reforme who advocated state socialism in some degree. 
Under the leadership of a Louis Blanc and a Ferdinand Flocon, these men be- 
lieved, as he did, that it was necessary to garner political power through democ- 
racy before attempting any social transformation. Engels was prepared to go hand 
in hand with the bourgeoisie whenever it took a confirmed democratic direction; 
he could not refuse to associate himself with this party whose program included 
the abolition of hired labor, although he must have known to what extent its 
parliamentary leader, Ledru-Rollin, was averse to communism. . . . He had 
learned from experience; he presented himself to Blanc as 'the official delegate of 
the German democrats in London, in Brussels, and on the Rhine' and 'the agent of 
the Chartist movement.'" Gustav Mayer, Friedrich Engels, vol. 1, Friedrich 
Engels in seiner Friihzeit (Berlin < 1933>), pp. 280-281. 24 [al7,l] 

"Under the Provisional Government it was customary, indeed it was a necessity, 
combining politics and enthusiasm at once, to preach to the generous workers who 
(as coidd be read on thousands of official placards) had ''placed three months of 
misery at the disposal of the republic,'' that the February Revolution had been 
waged in their own interests, and that the February Revolution was concerned 
above all with the interests of the ivorkers. But, after the opening of the National 
Assembly, everyone came down to earth. What was important now was to bring 
labor back to its old situation, as Minister Trelat said." Karl Marx, "Dem An- 
denken der Juni-Kampf er" [in Karl Marx als Denker, Mensch und Revolutiondr, 
ed. D. Rjazanov (Vienna and Berlin <1928>), p. 38; first published in the Neue 
rheinische Zeitung, ca. June 28, 184.8]. 23 [al7,2] 

Final sentence of the essay on the June combatants, coming directly after the 
description of the measures undertaken by the state to honor the memory of those 
victims who belonged to the bourgeoisie: "But the pleheians are tortured with 
hunger; reviled by the press; abandoned by doctors; abused by honest men as 
thieves, incendiaries, galley slaves; their women and children thrown into still- 
deeper misery; their best sons deported overseas; and it is the privilege, it is the 
right of the democratic press to entwine the laurels round their stern and threat- 
ening brows." Karl Marx, "Dem Andenken der Juni-Kampf er" [in Karl Marx als 
Denker, Mensch und Revolutiondr, ed. D. Rjazanov (Vienna and Berlin), p. 40; 
first published in the Neue rheinische Zeitung, ca. June 28, 1848]. 20 [al7,3] 



On Buret's De la Misere des classes laborieuses en Angleterre et en France and 
Engels' Lage der arbeitenden Klasse in England: "Charles Andler would like us to 
see in Engels' book only a 'recasting and sharpening' of the hook by Buret. In our 
view, however, there is grounds for comparison here only in the fact that both 
hooks. . . partly draw from the same source material. . . . The evaluative criteria 
of the French writer remain anchored in the concept of natural right . . . , while the 
German author . . . adduces the tendencies of economic and social development 
... in his explanations. Whereas Engels looks to communism as the sole salvation 
from the worsening situation of the present, Buret places his hopes in the complete 
mohilization of landed property, in a social politics and a constitutional system of 
industry." Gustav Mayer, Friedrich Engels, vol. 1, Friedrich Engels in seiner 
Friihzeit (Berlin <1933>), p. 195. [al7a,l] 

Engels on the June Insurrection. "In a diary meant for publication on the literary 
page of the Neue rheinische Zeitung, he wrote: 'Between the old Paris ami the new 
lay the fifteenth of May and the twenty-fifth of June. . . . Cavaignac's homhshells 
had effectively burst the invincible Parisian gaiety. "La Marseillaise" and "Le 
Chant du depart" ceased to he heard, and only the hourgeois still hummed to 
themselves their "Mourir pout' la patrie," while the workers, unemployed and 
weaponless, gnashed their teeth in suppressed rage." Gustav Mayer, Friedrich 
Engels, vol. 1, Freidrich Engels in seiner Friihzeit (Berlin <1933>), p. 317. 21 

[al7a,2] 

Engels, during the June Insurrection, referred to "Paris East and West as symhols 
for the two great enemy camps into which here, for the first time, the whole society 
splits." Gustav Mayer, Friedrich Engels, vol. 1, Friedrich Engels in seiner 
Friihzeit (Berlin <1933>), p. 312. [al7a,3] 

Marx calls the revolution "our brave friend, Robin Goodf ellow, the old mole that 
can work in the earth so fast, that worthy pioneer — the Revolution." In the same 
speech, at the conclusion: "To avenge the misdeeds of the ruling class, there ex- 
isted in the Middle Ages in Germany a secret trihunal called the Vehmgericht. If a 
red cross was seen marked on a house, people knew that its owner was doomed by 
the Vehm. All the houses of Europe arc now marked with the mysterious red cross. 
History is the judge; its executioner, the proletarian." Karl Marx, "Die Revolu- 
tionen von 1848 und das Proletariat," speech delivered on the fourth anniversary 
of the foundation of The Peoples Paper. Puhlished in The Peoples Paper, April 
19, 1856 2 " [in Karl Marx als Denker, Mensch und Revolutioniir, ed. D. Rjazanov 
(Vienna and Berlin < 1928>), pp. 42, 43]. [al7a,4] 

Marx defends Cahet against Proudhon as "worthy of respect for his practical 
attitude toward the proletariat." Marx to <Johann> Schweitzer, London, January 
24., 1865, in Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, Ausgeiviihlte Briefe, ed. V. Adorat- 
ski (Moscow and Leningrad, 1934), p. 143. 29 [al8,l] 



Marx on Proudhon: "The February Revolution certainly came at a very inconven- 
ient moment for Proudhon, who had irrefutably proved only a few weeks before 
that the 'era of revolutions' was ended forever. His speech to the National Assem- 
bly, however little insight it showed into existing conditions, was worthy of every 
praise. Coming after the June Insurrection, it was an act of great courage. In 
addition, it had the fortunate consequence that Thiers — by his reply (which was 
then issued as a special booklet), in which he opposed Proudhon's proposals — 
proved to the whole of Europe what an infantile catechism formed the pedestal for 
this intellectual pillar of the French bourgeoisie. Compared with Thiers, Proud- 
hon's stature indeed seemed that of an antediluvian colossus. . . . His attacks on 
religion, the church, and so on were of great merit locally at a time when the 
French socialists thought it desirable to show, by their religiosity, how superior 
they were to the bourgeois Voltaireanism of the eighteenth century and the Ger- 
man godlessness of the nineteenth. Just as Peter the Great defeated Russian har- 
barism by barbarity, Proudhon did his best to defeat French phrase-mongering by 
phrases." Marx to Schweitzer, London, January 24, 1865, in Karl Marx and Frie- 
drich Engels, Ausgewiihlte Briefe, ed. V. Adoratski (Moscow and Leningrad, 
1934), pp. 143-144. 30 [ a 18,2] 

"You'll he amused by the following: Journaldes economistes, August of this year, 
contains, in an article on . . . communism, the following: 'M. Marx is a cobbler, as 
another German communist, Weitling, is a tailor. . . . Neither does M. Marx pro- 
ceed beyond . . . abstract formulas, and he takes the greatest care to avoid hroach- 
ing any truly practical question. According to him [note the nonsense], the 
emancipation of the German people will he the signal for the emancipation of the 
human race; philosophy would be the head of this emancipation, the proletariat its 
heart. When all has been prepared, the Gallic cock will herald the Teutonic resur- 
rection. . . . Marx says that a universal proletariat must be created in Germany 
[!!] in order for the philosophical concept of comminiisni to he realized."' Engels 
to Marx, ca. September 16, 1846, in Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, <Briefivech~ 
sel,> vol. 1, 1844—1853, ed. Marx-Engels-Lenin Institute (Moscow, Leningrad, 
<and Ziirich,> 1935), pp. 45-46. :!l [al8,3] 

"It is a necessary result of every victorious reaction that the causes of the revolu- 
tion and especially of the counterrevolution should pass into utter ohlivion." 
Engels to Marx, Manchester, December 18, 1868, apropos of Eugene Tenot's 
books on the coup d'etat of 1851; in Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, A usgewdhlte 
Briefe, ed. V. Adoratski (Moscow and Leningrad, 1934), p. 209. 32 [al8,4] 

On national holidays, certain ohjects could he redeemed gratis from the pawn 
shops. [al8a,l] 



Laffitte calls himself "a citizen with possessions." Cited in Abel Bonnard, Les 
Moderes, in series entitled he Drame du present, vol. 1, (Paris < 1936>), p. 79. 

[al8a,2] 



"Poetry . . . has sanctioned the great error of separating the force of Lahor from 
Art. AJfred de Vigny's denunciation of the railroads is succeeded by Verhaeren's 
invective against the 'tentacled cities.' Poetry has taken flight from the forms of 
modern civilization. ... It has not understood that the elements of art can he 
found in any human activity whatsoever, and that its own powers are diminished 
by its refusal to entertain the possibility of inspiration in the things actually sur- 
rounding it." Pierre Hamp, "La Litterature, image de la societe," Encyclopedic 
francaise, vol. 16, Arts et litteratures dans la societe contemporaine, 1 < Paris, 
1935>,p. 64. [al8a,3] 

"From 1852 to 1865, France lent four and a half billion francs abroad. . . . The 
workers were even more directly affected than the bourgeois republicans by eco- 
nomic developments. The consequence of the trade treaty with England and the 
unemployment in the cotton industry caused hy the American Civil War inevitably 
made them realize their own dependence upon the international economic situ- 
ation." S. Kracauer, Jacques Offenbach und das Paris seiner Zeit (Amsterdam, 
1937), pp. 328, 330. 33 [al8a,4] 

Pierre Dupont's hymn to peace was still sung in the streets during the world 
exhibition of 1878. [al8a,5] 

In 1852, establishment of Credit Mobilier (Pereire) for financing the railroads. 
Establishment of Credit Foncier <land hanlo and of Au Bon Marche. [al8a,6] 

"In 1857, a year of crisis, a series of big financial trials started, under the influence 
of the opposition to the Saint-Simonian democratization of credit; they disclosed 
an enormous amount of corruption and shady practice, such as fraudulent bank- 
ruptcies, abuse of confidence, and artificial driving up of prices. An enormous 
sensation was caused by the trial of Mires, which started in 1861 and dragged on 
for years." S. Kracauer, Jacques Offenbach und das Paris seiner Zeit (Amster- 
dam, 1937), p. 262. " [al8a,7] 

Louis Philippe to Guizot: "We shall never he able to effect anything in France, and 
a day will come when my children will have no hread." S. Kracauer, Jacques 
Offenbach und das Paris seiner Zeit (Amsterdam, 1937), p. 139. 1:> [al8a,8] 

The manifesto of the Communist party was preceded hy many others. (1843: Con- 
siderant's "Manifeste de la Democratic paci/iqiie.") [al9,l] 

Fourier speaks of cohhlers as "men no less polite than others when they gather in 
association." Fourier, he Nouveau Monde industriel et societaire (Paris, 1829), 
p. 221. [al9,2] 



In 1822, France had only 16,000 passive electors and 110,000 active electors. 
According to the law of 1817, a man was a passive elector <eligible for election to 



the Chamber of Deputies) if he had reached the age of forty and paid 1,000 francs 
in direct taxation. He was an active elector < eligible to vote for deputies) if he had 
reached the age of thirty and paid 300 francs. 35 (Defaulting taxpayers had a man — 
a soldier? — quartered with them, whom they had to maintain until such time as 
they had settled their debt.) [al9,3] 

Proudhon on Hegel: "The antinomy is not resolved: here is the fundamental flaw 
of all Hegelian philosophy. The two terms of which the antinomy is composed 
balance out. ... A balance is by no means a synthesis." "Let us not forget," adds 
Cuvillier, "that Proudhon was for a long time a bookkeeper." Elsewhere, Proud- 
hon speaks of the ideas determining his own philosophy as "elementary ideas, 
common to bookkeeping and metaphysics alike." Armand Cuvillier, "Marx et 
Proudhon,"/! la Lumiere du marxisme, vol. 2 (Paris, 1937), pp. 180-181. 

[al9,4] 

The following premise of Proudhon's, claims Marx in Die heilige Familie < ? > , had 
been previously advanced by the English economist Sadler in 1830. Proudhon 
says: "'This immense power that results from the union and harmony of laborers, 
from the convergence and simultaneity of their efforts, has not been recompensed 
hy the capitalist.' Thus it is that 200 grenadiers succeeded, within several hours, 
in raising the obelisk of Luxor on the Place de la Concorde, whereas a single man 
working for 200 days would have obtained no result at all. 'Separate the laborers 
from one another, and the amount paid daily to each would perhaps exceed the 
value of each individual product, but this is not what is at issue here. A force of a 
thousand men working over a period of twenty days has been paid what a single 
man would earn in fifty-fi ve years; hut this force of a thousand has produced, in 
twenty days, what the power of a single man, multiplied across a million centuries, 
could not achieve. Is there equity in the marketplace?'" Cited in Armand Cuvil- 
lier, "Marx et Proudhon," A Im. Lumiere du marxisme, vol. 2 (Paris, 1937), p. 196. 

[al9,5] 

Unlike Saint-Simon and Fourier, Proudhon was not interested in history. "The 
history of property among ancient peoples is, for us, nothing more than a matter 
of erudition and curiosity" (cited in Cuvillier, "Marx et Proudhon," p. 201). 
Conservatism bound up with a lack of historical sense is just as petty bourgeois 
as conservatism bound up with historical sense is feudal. [al 9a, 1 ] 

Proudhon's apology for the coup d'etat: to he found in his letter to Louis Napoleon 
of April 21, 1858, where it is said of the dynastic principle "that this principle, 
which before '89 was simply the incarnation, in one chosen family, of divine right 
or religious thought, ... is or can he defined today as . . . the incarnation, in one 
chosen family, of human right or the rational thought of the revolution." Cited in 
Armand Cuvillier, "Marx et Proudhon," A la Lumiere du marxisme, vol. 2, part 1 
(Paris, 1937), p. 219. [al9a,2] 



Cuvillier presents Proudhon as a precursor of "national socialism" in the fascist 
sense. [al9a,3] 

"Proudhon believed that one could aholish surplus value, along with unearned 
income, without transforming the organization of production. . . . Proudhon con- 
ceived this preposterous dream of socializing exchange within a context of nonso- 
cialized production." A. Cuvillier, "Marx et Proudhon," A la Lumiere du 
marxisme, vol. 2, part 1 (Paris, 1937), p. 210. [al9a,4] 

"Value measured by labor . . . is . . . , in Proudhon's eyes, the very goal of pro- 
gress. For Marx, it is quite otherwise. The determination of value by labor is not 
an ideal; it is a fact. It exists in our current society." Armand Cuvillier, "Marx et 
Proudhon," A la Lumiere du marxisme, vol. 2, part 1 (Paris, 1937), p. 208. 

[al9a,5] 

Proudhon spoke out extremely maliciously against Fourier, and he spoke no less 
derogatorily of Cabet. This last provoked a reprimand from Marx, who saw in 
Cabet, by reason of his political role in the working class, a highly respectable 
man. [al9a,6] 

Blanqui's exclamation, on entering the salon of Mile, de Montgolfier on the evening 
of July 29, 1830: "The Romantics are done for!"'" [al9a,7] 

Beginning of the June Insurrection: "On June 19, the dissolution of the national 
workshops was announced as imminent; a crowd gathered around the Hotel de 
Ville. On June 21, he Moniteur announced that, the following day, workers aged 
seventeen to twenty-five would he enlisted in the army or conducted to Sologne and 
other regions. It was this last expedient that most exasperated the Paris workers. 
All these men who were used to doing detailed manual work in front of a work- 
bench and vise rejected the idea of going to till the earth and lay out roads in a 
marshland. One of the cries of the insurrection was: 'We won't go! We won't go! "' 
Gustave Geffroy, L'Enferme (Paris, 1926), vol. 1, p. 193. [a20,l] 

Blanqui in he Liberateur, March 1834: "He demolishes, by a comparison, the 
notorious commonplace, 'The rich put the poor to work.' 'Approximately,' he 
says, 'as plantation owners put Negroes to work, with the difference that the 
worker is not capital to he hushanded like the slave.'" Gustave Geffroy, L'En- 
ferme (Paris, 1926), vol. 1, p. 69. [a20,2] 

Garat's theme of April 2, 1848: "Establishment of a cordon sanitaire around the 
dwellings of the rich, who are destined to die of hunger." Gustave Geffroy, UEn- 
ferme (Paris, 1926), vol. 1, p. 152. [a20,3] 



Refrain of 1848: "Hat in hand when facing the cap, / Kneel down hefore the 
worker!" [a20,4] 



Fifty thousand workers in the June Insurrection in Paris. 



[a20,5] 



Proudhon defines himself as "a new man, a man of polemics and not of the barri- 
cades; a man who would know how to reach his goal hy dining every day with the 
prefect of police and taking for his confidants all the De la Hoddes of the world." 
This in 1850. Cited in Gel'f roy, L 'Enferme (Paris, 1926), vol. l,pp. 180-181. 

[a20,6] 

"Under the Empire — to its very end, in fact — there was a renewal and develop- 
ment of the ideas of the eighteenth century. . . . People, in those days, readily 
called themselves atheists, materialists, positivists; and the vaguely religious or 
manifestly Catholic republican of 1848 became a . . . curiosity." Gustave Geff roy, 
L'Enferme (Paris, 1897), p. 247. [a20,7] 

Blanqui, in the proceedings taken against the Societe des Amis du Peuple, under 
questioning by the presiding judge: '"What is your profession?' Blanqui: 'Prole- 
tarian.' Judge: 'That is not a profession.' Blanqui: 'What! Not a profession? It is 
the profession of thirty million Frenchmen who live by their lahor and who are 
deprived of political rights.' Judge: 'Well, so he it. Let the clerk record that the 
accused is a proletarian. '" Defense du citoyen Louis Auguste Blanqui devant la 
cour d'assises, 1832 (Paris, 1832), p. 4. [a20,8] 

Baudelaire on Barhier's Rimes heroiqites: "Here, to speak frankly, all the folly of 
the century appears, resplendent in its unconscious nakedness. Under the pretext 
of writing sonnets in honor of great men, the poet has celehrated the lightning rod 
and the automated loom. The prodigious ahsurdities to which this confusion of 
ideas and functions could lead us is obvious." Baudelaire, L'Art romantique, ed. 
Hachette, vol. 3 (Paris), p. 336. "' [a20a,l] 

Blanqui, in his Defense du citoyen Louis Auguste Blanqui devant la cour d'as- 
sises, 1832 (Paris, 1832), p. 14.: "You have confiscated the rifles of July — yes. Bui 
the bullets have been fired. Every bullet of the workers of Paris is on its way round 
the world." [a20a,2] 

"The man of genius represents at once the greatest strength and the greatest weak- 
ness of humanity. . . . He tells the nations that the interests of the weak and the 
interests of genius coalesce, such that the one cannot be endangered without en- 
dangering the other, such that the ultimate limit of perfectibility will be reached 
only when the right of the weakest will have replaced, on the throne, the right of 
the strongest." Auguste Blanqui, Critique sociale (Paris, 1885), vol. 2, Fragments 
et notes, p. 46 ("Propriete intellectuelle," 1867 — conclusion!). [a20a,3] 



On the compliments paid hy Lamartine to Rothschild: "M. de Lamartine, this 
Captain Cook of oceangoing politics, this Sinbad the Sailor of the nineteenth cen- 
tury, . . . this voyager no less roving than Ulysses, though happier, who has taken 



the Sirens to he crew of his ship and aired upon the shores of all the parties the 
ever-varied music of his convictions, M. de Lamartine, in his never-ending odys- 
sey, has just gently beached his aeolian hark under the porticoes of the Stock 
Exchange." Auguste Blanqui, Critique sociale (Paris, 1885), vol. 2, p. 100 ("La- 
martine et Rothschild," April 1850). [a20a,4] 

Doctrine of Blanqui: "No! No one has access to the secret of the future. Scarcely 
possihle for even the most clairvoyant are certain presentiments, rapid glimpses, a 
vague and fugitive coup d'oeil. The Revolution alone, as it clears the terrain, will 
reveal the horizon, will gradually remove the veils and open up the roads, or 
rather the multiple paths, that lead to the new order. Those who pretend to have in 
their pocket a complete map of this unknown land — they truly are madmen." 
Auguste Blanqui, Critique sociale (Paris, 1885), vol. 2, pp. 115-116 ("Les Sectes 
et la Revolution," Octoher 1866). [a20a,5] 

Parliament of 1849: "In a speech delivered to the National Assemhly on April 14, 
M. Considerant, a disciple ... of Fourier, had this to say: 'The time of ohedience 
is past: men feel that they are equal, and they want to he free. They do not he- 
lieve any longer, and they wish to enjoy themselves. There you have the state 
of souls.' — 'You mean the state of hrutes!' interrupted M. de La Rochcjaque- 
lein." L. B. Bon jean, Socialisme et sens commun (Paris, May 1849), pp. 28-29. 

[a21,l] 

"M. Dumas (of the Institut) exclaims: ' The hlinding dust of foolish theories raised 
by the whirlwind of Fehruary has dissipated in the air, and, in the wake of this 
vanished cloud, the year 1844 reappears with its shining countenance and its 
sublime doctrine of material interests. '" Auguste Blanqui, Critique sociale (Paris, 
1885), vol. 2, p. 104 ("Discours de Lamartine," 1850). [a21,2] 

In 1850, Blanqui pens a polemic: "Rapport gigantesque de Thiers sur l'assistance 
publique." [a21,3] 

"Will matter . . . assume the form of a single point in the sky? Or he content with a 
thousand, ten thousand, a hundred thousand points that would barely enlarge its 
meager domain? No — its vocation, its law, is infinity. It will not in the least allow 
itself to be outflanked by the void. Space >vill not become its dungeon." A. Blanqui, 
L'Eternite par les astres: Hypothese astronomique (Paris, 1872), p. 54. [a21 ,4] 

At the end of a meeting in the early days of the Third Repuhlic: "Louise Michel 
announced that an effort would he made to contact the wives and children of 
imprisoned comrades. 'What we ask of y»n,' she said, 'is not an act of charity hut 
an act of solidarity; for those who hestow charity, when they do hestow it:, are 
proud and self-satisfied, but we — we are never satisfied.'" Daniel Halevy. Pays 
parisiens (Paris <1932>),p. 165. [a21,5] 



Moiwelle Nemesis, by Barthelemy (Paris, 1844), contains, in chapter 16 ("The 
Workers"), a "satire" which very emphatically takes up the demands of the 
working class. Barthelemy is already acquainted with the concept of proletarian. 

[a21,6] 

Barricades: "At nine o'clock in the evening, on a beautiful summer night, Paris 
without streetlights, without shops, without gas, without moving vehicles, pre- 
sented a unique tableau of desolation. At midnight, with its paving stones piled 
high, its barricades, its walls in ruins, its thousand carriages stranded in the mud, 
its boulevards devastated, its dark streets deserted, Paris was like nothing ever 
seen before. Thebes and Herculaneum are less sad. No noises, no shadows, no 
living beings — except the motionless worker who gnarded the barricade with his 
rifle and pistols. To frame it all: the hlood of the day preceding and the uncertainty 
of the morrow." Barthelemy and Mery, V Insurrection: Poeme (Paris, 1830), 
pp. 52-53 (note). 0 Parisian Antiquity 0 [a21a,l] 

"Who would believe it! It is said that, incensed at the hour, / Latter-day Joshuas, 
at the foot of every clocktower, / Were firing on clock faces to make the day stand 
still." At this point a note: "This is a unique feature in the history of the insurrec- 
tion: it is the only act of vandalism carried out hy the people against public monu- 
ments. And what vandalism! How well it expresses the situation of hearts and 
minds on the evening of the twenty-eighth! 19 With what rage one watched the 
shadows falling and the implacable advance of the needle toward night — just as on 
ordinary days! What was most singular ahout this episode was that it was ob- 
served, at the very same hour, in different parts of the city. This was the expres- 
sion not of an aberrant notion, an isolated whim, hut of a widespread, nearly 
general sentiment." Barthelemy and Mery, L'lnsurrection: Poeme dedie aux 
Parisiens (Paris, 1830), pp. 22, 52. [a21a,2] 

During the July Revolution, for a short time before the tricolor was raised, the 
flag of the insurgents was black. With it the female <body> was covered, presum- 
ably the same one carried by torchlight through Paris. 10 See Barthelemy and 
Mery, L'lnsurrection (Paris, 1830), p. 51. [a21a,3] 

Railroad poetry: 

To a station 'neath the rails everybody is bound. 
Wherever the train crisscrosses the land, 
There's no more distinction twixt humble and grand; 
All classes are equal six feet underground. 

Barthelemy, Nouvelle Nemesis, no. 12, "La Vapeur" (Paris, .1845) <p. 46>. 

[a22,l] 

Opening of the preface to Tissot's Dela Manie du suicide et de Vesprit de revoke: 
"It is impossible not to be struck hy two moral phenomena which are like the 



symptoms of a disease that today, in its own particular way, is ravaging the hody 
and limbs of society: we are speaking of suicide and revolt. Impatient with all law, 
discontented with all position, the individual rises up equally against human na- 
ture and against mankind, against himself and against society. . . . The man of our 
time, and the Frenchman perhaps more than any other, having violently broken 
with the past . . . and looked with fear toward a future whose horizon already 
seems to him so gloomy, kills himself if he is weak ... , if he lacks faith in . . . the 
betterment of men and, above all, lacks faith in a providence capable of deriving 
good from evil." J. Tissot, De la Manie du suicide et de Vesprit de revoke (Paris, 
1840) <p. v>. The author claims not to have known the books by Frcgier, Villerme, 
and Degeraude at the time he drafted his work. [a22,2] 

Concerning Flora Tristan's "Mephis": "This proletarian name, which now is so 
readily intelligible, . . . sounded extremely romantic and mysterious in those days. 
It marked the pariah, the galley slave, the carbonaro, the artist, the regenerator, 
the adversary of the Jesuits. From his encounter with a beautiful Spaniard was 
horn the inspired woman who must redeem the world." Jean Cassou, Quarante- 
huit (Paris <1939>), p. 12. [a22,3] 

With regard to the exotic enterprises of Considerant and Cabet, Blanqui speaks of 
experiments carried out "in a corner of the human species." Cited in Cassou, 
Quarante-huit, p. 41. [a22,4] 

The unemployment rate in England between 1850 and 1914 rose only once above 8 
percent. (In 1930, it reached 16 percent.) [a22,5] 

"The typographer Burgy, in his book Present et avenir des ouvriers, preaches . . . 
celibacy to his companions: the picture of the proletarian condition would not be 
complete if one left out: the shadows of resignation and defeatism." Jean Cassou, 
Quarante-huit (Paris <1939>), p. 77. [a22a,l] 

Guizot, in Du Mouvement et du resistance en politique: "Any man of above-aver- 
age intelligence who has neither property nor business — that is to say, who is 
unwilling or unable to pay a tribute to the state — should he considered dangerous 
from a political standpoint." Cited in Cassou, Quarante-huit, p. 152. [a22a,2] 

Guizot in 1837, to the Chamher: "Today — apart from force of law — you have hut 
one effective guarantee against this revolutionary disposition of the poorer classes: 
work, the constant necessity of work." Cited in Cassou, pp. 152-153. [a22a,3] 

Blanqui, in his letter to Maillard: "Thank heaven there are so many bourgeois in 
the camp of the proletariat. It is they who represent the chief strength of this 
camp, or at least its most lasting strength. They provide it with a contingent of 
luminaries such as the people themselves, unfortunately, cannot yet furnish. It 
was the bourgeois who first raised the flag of the proletariat, who formulated, 



propagated, and maintained the egalitarian doctrines, and who restored them 
after their downfall. Everywhere it is bourgeois who lead the people in their battles 
against the bourgeoisie." A passage immediately following deals with the bourgeoi- 
sie's exploitation of the proletariat as political shock troops. Maurice Dommanget, 
Blanqui a Belle-Ue (Paris, 1935 > , pp. 176-177. [a22a,4] 

"The terrible scourge of poverty, so relentless in its torments, requires a no less 
terrible remedy, and celibacy appears the most certain among those pointed out to 
us by social science." In connection with a reference to Malthus: "In our day the 
pitiless Marcus [evidently used for "Malthus"], unfolding the dismal consequences 
of a limitless increase in population . . . , has ventured to propose asphyxiating 
those babies born to indigent families that already have three children, and then 
compensating the mothers for suffering an act of such cruel necessity. . . . Here we 
have the last word of the economists of England!" [Jules Burgy,] Present et avenir 
des ouvriers (Paris, 1847), pp. 30, 32-33. 

[a22a,5] 

There exists on earth an infernal vat 

Named Paris; it is one large oven, 

A stony pit of wide circumference, 

Ringed hy three bends of a muddy yellow river. 

It is a seething volcano that never stops erupting; 

Its shock waves travel through human matter. 

Auguste Barhier, Iambes etpoemes (Paris, 1845), p. 65 ("La Cuve" <The Vat>). 

[a23,l] 

The Paris purebred is this pale guttersnipe, 

Sainted growth, yellowed like an old penny, 

This boy hooting, out at all hours 

Strolling indolent down unfamiliar lanes, 

Routing the skinny mutts, or, all along the high walls, 

Chalking a thousand unchaste figures, whisding the while, 

This child, believing nothing, who aims up his nose at mother; 

The admonition to pray is for him a bad joke. 

Auguste Barbier, Iambes et pohnes, p. 68 ("La Cuve"). Hugo had already re- 
touched these traits in the figure of Gavroche. [a23,2] 
