[Daumier] 



A paradoxical description of Daumier's art: "Caricature, for him, became a sort 
of philosophic operation which consisted in separating a man from that which 
society had made of him, in order to reveal what he was at bottom, what he 
could have been under different circumstances. He extracted, in a word, the 
latent self." Edouard Drumont, Les He'ros et les pitres (Paris <1900>),p. 299 ("Dau- 
mier"). [bl,l] 

On Daumier's bourgeois: "This ossified, inert, crystallized being who waits for the 
omnibus leans on an umbrella that expresses some unutterable idea of absolute 
petrifaction." Edouard Drnmont, Les Heros et les pitres (Paris), p. 304 ("Dau- 
mier"). [bl,2] 

"Many writers . . . acquired fame and fortune by mocking the faults and infirmi- 
ties of others. Monnier, on the other hand, did not have to go very far to find his 
model: he planted himself before the mirror, listened to himself thinking and 
talking, and, finding himself highly ridiculous, he conceived this cruel incarna- 
tion, this prodigious satire of the French bourgeois, whom he named Joseph Prud- 
homme." Alphonse Daudet, Trente ans de Paris, p. 91. [bl,3] 

"Not only does caricature greatly accentuate the techniques of drawing, . . . hut it 
has always been the means of introducing new subject matter into art. It was 
through Monnier, Gavarni, and Daumier that the bourgeois society of this century 
was opened up to art." Eduard Fuchs, Die Karikatur der europdischen Volker, 
4th ed. (Munich <1921>), vol. 1, p. 16. [bl,4] 

"On August 7, 1830, Louis Philippe was . . . proclaimed . . . king. On November 4 
of that same year, the first issue of La Caricature appeared, the journal created by 
Philipon." Eduard Fuchs, Die Karikatur der europdischen Volker (Munich), vol. 
l,p. 326. [bl,5] 

Michelet wanted to see one of his works illustrated by Daumier. [bl,6] 



"Philipon invented a new character type, . . . which was said to have brought him 
nearly as much . . . popularity as his pears: 'Robert Macaire,' the type of the 



unscrupulous speculator and promoter.'" Eduard Fuchs, Die Karikatur der Si- 

europdischen Volker (Munich), vol. 1, p. 354. [bl,7] ^ 

SP 

"The last issue of La Caricature, dated August 27, 1835, was . . . devoted ... to O 

the promulgation of the . . . September Laws, . . . which . . . were represented in § 

the form of pears." Eduard Fuchs, Die Karikatur der europdischen Volker, vol. 1, h 
p. 352. [bl,8] 



Travies, the creator of Mayeux; Gavarni, the creator of Thomas Vireloque; Dau- 
mier, the creator of Ratapoil — the Bonapartist lumpenproletarian. [bl,9] 

On January 1, 1856, Philipon rebaptizes he Journal pour rire as he Journal 
amusaut. [bl,10] 



"Whenever a priest . . . exhorted the girls of a village never to go to the dance, or 
the peasants never to frequent the tavern, Courier's epigrams would climb the bell 
tower and sound the alarm, proclaiming the advent of the Inquisition in France. 
His pamphlets, meanwhile, would make the whole country listen to the sermon." 
Alfred Nettement, Histoire de la litterature f ranqaise sous la Restauratiou (Paris, 
1858), vol. 1, p. 421. [bla.l] 



"Mayeux ... is actually an imitation. Under Louis XIV, ... a particular costume 
dance caused an uproar: children made up as old men, and sporting enormous 
hunchbacks, executed grotesque figures. It was known as the "Mayeux of Brit- 
tany" dance. The Mayeux who was made a member of the Garde Nationale in 1830 
was merely a very ill-bred descendant of these old Mayeux." Edouard Fournier, 
Enigmes des rues de Paris (Paris, 1860), p. 351. [bla,2] 

On Daumier: "By no one more than Daumier has the hourgeois heen known and 
loved (after the fashion of artists) — the bourgeois, this last vestige of the Middle 
Ages, this Gothic ruin that dies so hard, this type at once so commonplace and so 
eccentric." Charles Baudelaire, Les Dessius de Daumier (Paris < 1924>), p. 14. 2 

[bla,3] 



On Daumier: "His caricature has formidable hreadth, hut it is quite without bile 
or rancor. In all his work there is a foundation of decency and bonhomie. We 
should note that he has often refused to handle certain very fine and violent 
satirical themes, because, he said, they exceeded the limits of the comic and could 
wound the feelings of his fellow men." Charles Baudelaire, Les Dessius de Dau- 
mier (Paris <1924>), p. 1.6. ;> [bla,4] 



On Monnier: "But what a great source these merciless, impertnrhahle commenta- 
tors remain! Balzac took the name . . . 'Cihot' from Monnier, as well as the names 
'Desroches' and 'Descoings.' And Anatole France took from him the name 'Ma- 
dame Bergeret,' just as Flaubert had taken, with a very slight alteration, the name 




Honore Daumier, ca. 1857. Photo by Nadar. Collection Societe Franchise de 
PhotogTaphie. 



'Monsieur Pegnchet.'" Marie- Jeanne Durry, "De Monnier a Balzac," Vendredi, 
March 20, 1936, p. 5. [bla,5] 



When does Gavroche first appear? Who are his forebears? Is his first appearance 
in Les Muenbles? Abel Bonnard on the homme yn?/a#<adulteratedman> — "good 
only for provoking events he could not control." "This type of individual, origi- 
nating in the nobility, has undergone a descent — and lost all his gilding in the 
process — through the whole spectrum of society, to the point where what was 
born in the foam at the surface has come to rest in the slime at the bottom. What 
began in persiflage has ended in a sneer. Gavroche is, very simply, the marquis of 
the gutter " Abel Bonnard, Les Moderes, in series entitled Le Drame du present, vol. 
1 (Paris<l936>),p. 294. [bla,6] 

"Everyone knew Daumier's mythological caricatures, which, in the words of 
Baudelaire, made Achilles, Odysseus, and the rest look like a lot of played-out 
tragic actors, inclined to take pinches of snuff at moments when no one was look- 
ing." S. Kracauer, Jacques Offenbach and das Paris seiner Zeit (Amsterdam, 
1937), p. 237. 1 [b2,l] 

Fourier. "Not content with extracting from his works the innumerable amusing 
inventions to he found there, the gazetteers add to them — for example, the busi- 
ness of the tail with an eye on its tip, supposedly an attribute of men of the future. 
He protests vehemently against this malicious fabrication." F. Armand and 
R. Mauhlanc, Fourier (Paris, 1937), vol. 1, p. 58. [b2,2] 

The Pagan School is opposed not only to the spirit of Christianity but also to the 
spirit of modernity. Baudelaire illustrates this, in his essay "L'Ecole paiieime," with 
the aid of Daumier: "Daumier did a remarkable series of lithographs, L'Histoire 
ancienne, which was, so to speak, the best paraphrase of the famous saying, 'Who 
will deliver us from the Greeks and Romans?' Daumier pounced brutally upon 
antiquity and mythology, and spit on them. The hotheaded Achilles, the prudent 
Ulysses, the wise Penelope, that great ninny Telemachus, the beautiful Helen 
who ruined Iroy, the ardent Sappho, patroness of hysterical women — all were 
portrayed with a farcical homeliness that recalled those old carcasses of classical 
actors who take a pinch of snuff in the wings." Charles Baudelaire, L'Art roman- 
tique, ed. Hachette (Paris), vol. 3, p. 305. 5 [b2,3] 



Types: Mayeux (Travies), Robert Macaire (Daumier), Prutlhonune (Monnier). 

[b2,4] 