[Literary History, Hugo] 



"Thiers argued that, since education was 'the beginning of ease, and since ease was 
not reserved for all,' then education should not he within reach of all. Moreover, 
he held lay instructors . . . responsible for the events of June . . . and declared 
himself 'ready to put the clergy in charge of all primary education. "' A . Malct and 



February 25, 1848: "During the afternoon, armed mobs demanded that the red 
flag replace the tricolor flag. . . . After a violent debate, Lamartine managed to 
turn them hack with an improvised address, whose concluding words have re- 
mained famous: T shall repudiate to the very death,' he cried, 'this flag of hlood, 
and you ought to spurn it more than I. For this red flag that y»u wave hef ore us has 
previously heen unfurled only on the Champ de Mars, soaked with the hlood of the 
people in '91 and '93, whereas the tricolor flag has been paraded the world over, 
with the name, the glory, and the liherty of the Fatherland." A. Malet and 



"In an admirahle article entitled 'Le Depart,' Balzac lamented the fall of the 
Bourhons, which for him meant the death knell of the arts and the triumph of the 
peddlers of political nostrums. Invoking the vessel on which the king was depart- 
ing, he exclaimed: ''There is law and logic; beyond this little hoat are the storms."' 
J. Lucas-Dubreton, Le Comte d'Artois, Charles X <Paris, 1927> , p. 233. [dl,3] 

"Who knows the titles of all the books that bear the name of M. Dumas? Does he 
know them himself? If he does not keep a two-column record with debits and 
credits, he will no doubt have forgotten . . . more than one of those children of 
whom he is the legitimate father, or the natural father, or the godfather. His output 
in recent months has amounted to not less than thirty volumes." Paulin Limayrac, 
"Du Roman actuel et de nos romanciers," Revue des deux mondes, 11, no. 3 



P. Grillet, XIX e Siecle (Paris, 1919), p. 258. 



[dl.l] 



P. Grillet, XIX" Siecle (Paris, 1919), p. 245. 



[dl,2] 



(Paris, 1845), pp. 953-954. 



[dl,4] 



Ironical: "What a happy thought on the part of M. de Balzac — to predict a peasant 
revolt and demand the reestablishment of feudalism! What is so surprising in that? 
It is his idea of socialism. Mme. Sand has another, and M. Sue likewise. To each 



novelist his own." Paulin Limayrac, "Du Roman actuel et de nos romanciers," 
Revuedesdeuxmond.es, 11, no. 3 (Paris, 1845), pp. 955-956. [dl,5] 



"Citizen Hugo made his debut at the tribune of the National Assembly. He was 
what we expected: a phrasemaker and a gesticulator, full of empty, high-flown 
oratory. Continuing along the perfidious and slanderous path of his recent broad- 
side, he spoke of the unemployed, of the indigent, of the idlers and do-nothings, 
the scoundrels who are the praetorians of the uprising, the condottieri. In a word, 
he ran the metaphor ragged to arrive at an attack on the national workshops." Les 
Boulets rouges: Feuille du club pacifique des droits de Vhomme, ed. Pelin, 1st 
year, June 22-25 [1848] ("Faits divers"). [dla.l] 

"Itis as though Lamartine had made it his mission to implement Plato's teaching 
on the necessity of banishing poets from the republic, and one cannot help smiling 
as one reads this author's account of the worker who was part of the large demon- 
stration in front of the Hotel de Ville, and who shouted at the speaker: 'You're 
nothing but a lyre! Go sing!"' Friedrich Szarvady, Paris, 1848-1852, vol. 1 (Ber- 
lin, 1852), p. 333. [dla,2] 

Chateauhriand: "He hrings into fashion that vague sadness, . . . 'le mal du siecle' 
<the infirmity of the century). A. Malet and P. Grillet, XIX" Siecle (Paris, 1919), 
p. 145. [dla,3] 

'"If we could have ourwish . . .' This desire, this regret — Baudelaire was the first 
to interpret it, twice giving voice, in L'Art romantique, to unexpected praise for a 
poet of his day, the author of a "Chant des ouvriers," that Pierre Dupont who, he 
tells us, 'after 1848 . . . attained great glory.' The specification of this revolution- 
ary date is very important here. Without tliis indication, we might have trouhle 
understanding the defense of popular poetry, and of an art 'inseparable from 
utility,' 1 on the part of a writer who could pass for the chief architect of the 
rupture of poetry and art with the masses. . . . 1848: that is the hour when the 
street beneath Baudelaire's window begins in very truth to tremhle, when the 
theater of the interior must yield him up in all magnificence, to the theater of the 
exterior, as someone who incarnates, at the highest level, the concern for human 
emancipation in all its forms, as well as the consciousness, alas, of everything that 
is ridiculously ineffectual in this aspiration alone, wherehy the gift of the artist 
and of the man becomes total — Baudelaire's anonymous collaboration on Le Salut 
public of Fehruary 27 and 28 effectively proving the point. . . . This communion of 
the poet, of the authentic artist, with a vast class of people impelled hy their ardent 
hunger for freedom, even partial freedom, has every chance of emerging spontane- 
ously at times of great social ferment, when reservations can be laid aside. Rim- 
haud, in whom the claims of the human tend, nonetheless, ... to follow an infinite 
course, places, from the outset, all his confidence and elan vital in the Commune. 
Mayakovsky goes to great lengths to silence in himself — hottling it up to the point 
of explosion — everything horn of individual feeling that might not conduce to the 



exclusive glory of the triumphant Bolshevik Revolution." Andre Breton, "La 
Grande Actualite poetique," Minotaure, 2, no. 6 (Winter 1935), p. 61. [d2,l] 



"Progress is the very footstep of God." Victor Hugo, "Ajiniversaire de la revolu- 
tion de 1848," Fehruary 24, 1855 (on Jersey), p. 14. [d2,2] 

"Victor Hugo is the man of the nineteenth century, as Voltaire was the man of the 
eighteenth." "The nineteenth century thus comes to a close before its end. Its poet 
is dead." Obituary notices for Hugo in he National Republicain de VArdeche and 
he Phare des Charentes [Victor Hugo devant Vopinion (Paris, 1885), pp. 229, 
224]. [d2,3] 

Students of the schools of France, 

Cheerful volunteers for progress, 

Let us follow the people in its wisdom; 

Let us turn our backs on Malthus and his decrees! 

Let us light up the new roadways 

Which labor shall open; 

For socialism soars on two wings, 

The student and the worker. 

Pierre Dupont, he Chant des etudiants (Paris, 1849). [d2a,l] 

A. Michiels, Hutoire des idees litter aires en Frame au XIX siecle (Paris, 1863), 
vol. 2, provides, in his portrait of Sainte-Beuve, an outstanding description of the 
reactionary man of letters at midcentury. [d2a,2] 

1 caused a revolutionary wind to blow; 
I made the old lexicon don the insurgents' red cap. 
No more high-flown words! No more uncouth words! 
I raised a storm at the bottom of the inkwell. 

Victor Hugo, cited in Paul Bourget, obituary for Victor Hugo in he Journal des 
debuts [Victor Hugo devant Vopinion (Paris, 1885), p. 93]. [d2a,3] 

On Victor Hugo: "He was . . . the poet not of his own sufferings . . . but of the 
passions of those around him. The mournful voices of the victims of the Terror . . . 
made their way into the Odes. Then the trumpet blasts of the Napoleonic victories 
resounded in other odes. . . . Later on, he felt obliged to let the tragic cry of 
militant democracy pass through him. And what is La Legende des siecles ... if 
not the echo of the great turmoil of human history? ... It often seems as though he 
had collected the sighs of all families in his domestic verse, the hreath of all lovers 
in his love poems. ... It is for this reason that, . . . thanks to some mysterious 
quality in him that is always collective and general, Victor Hugo's poetry possesses 
an epic character." Paul Bourget, ohituary notice for Victor Hugo in he Journal 
des debuts [Victor Hugo devant ropinion (Paris, 1885), pp. 96-97]. [d2a,4] 






Victor Hugo, ca. 1860. Photo by Etienne Carjat. Courtesy, Museum of Fine Arts, 
Boston. Reproduced with permission. • 1999 Museum of Fine Arts, Boston. 
All rights reserved. 



It is worthy of note that the preface to Mademoiselle de Mnupiri 2 already seems to 
be pointing the way to Vxrt pour I' art. "A stage play is not a railroad train." 

[d2a,5] 

Gautier on the press: "Charles X alone has understood the question rightly. In 
ordering the suppression of the newspapers, he rendered a great service to the arts 
and to civilization. Newspapers are akin to courtiers and go-betweens, those who 
interpose themselves between artists and the puhlic, hetween the king and the 
people. . . . These perpetual yelpings . . . create such an atmosphere of mistrust 
that . . . royalty and poetry, the two greatest things in the world, hecome impossi- 
ble." Cited in A. Michiels, Histoire des idees litteraires en France au XIX' siecle 
(Paris, 1863), vol. 2, p. 445. This attitude earned Gautier the friendship of Balzac. 

[d3,l] 

"In the transports of his hatred [for the critics], M. Thcophile Gautier denies all 
progress, especially in the area of literature and art, as does his master, Victor 
Hugo." Alfred Michiels, Histoire des idees litteraires en France au XIX" siecle 
(Paris, 1863), vol. 2, p. 444. [d3,2] 



"Steam will conquer cannon. In two hundred years — well before, perhaps — great 
armies from England, France, and America . . . will descend upon old Asia under 
the leadership of their generals. Their weapons will consist of pickaxes, and their 
horses will he locomotives. Singing, they will fall upon these uncnltivated, unused 
lands. ... It is thus, perhaps, that war will be waged, in the future, against all 
unproductive nations, hy virtue of that axiom of mechanics which applies to all 
things: there mnst he no wasted energy!" Maxime Du Camp, Les Chants modernes 
(Paris, 1855), p. 20 ("Preface"). [d3,3] 

In the preface to La Comedie humaine, Balzac declares himself on the side of 
Bossuet and Bonald, and affirms: "I write by the faint light of two eternal verities: 
Religion and Monarchy." [d3,4] 

Balzac on the press, in the preface to the first edition of Un Grand Homme de 
province a Paris: "The public is unaware of how many evils heset literature in its 
commercial transformation. ... In the old days, newspapers . . . required a cer- 
tain numher of copies . . . This was over and ahove payment for articles attractive 
to . . . hooksellers — payment often made without any guarantee that these articles 
would appear in print. . . . Today, this douhle tax has been driven up by the 
exorbitant price of advertising, which costs as much as the actual production of 
the hook. . . . One can only conclude that newspapers are fatal for modern writ- 
ers." Cited in Georges Batault, he Pontife de la demagogie: Victor Hugo (Paris, 
1934), p. 229. [d3,5] 



In the dehate in the Chamher on Novemher 25, 1848 — June repression — Victor 
Hugo voted against Cavaignac. [d3,6] 



"The multiplication of readers is the multiplication of loaves. On the clay Christ 
discovered this symbol, he foreshadowed the printing press." Victor Hugo, Wil- 
liam Shakespeare, cited in Batault <Le Pontife de la demagogie (Paris, 1934)>, 
p. 142. [d3,7] 

Maxime Lishonne comments, in L'Ami dupeuple, on Victor Hugo's will. Beginning 
and conclusion of this statement: "Victor Hugo divides his fortune of 6 million 
francs as follows: 700,000 francs to the members of his family; 2 . 5 million francs to 
Jeanne and Georges, bis grandchildren. . . . And for the revolutionaries who, 
since 1830, sacrificed with him for the republic, and who are still in this world, a 
lifetime annuity: twenty sous per day!" Cited in Victor Hugo devant V opinion 
(Paris, 1885), pp. 167-168. [d3a,l] 

In the debate in the Chamber on November 25, 1848, Victor Hugo voted against 
Cavaignac's repression of thejune revolt. But on June 20 in the Chamber, during 
the discussion of the national workshops, he had coined the phrase: "Hie Mon- 
archy had its idlers; the Republic will have its do-nothings." [d3a,2] 

Seigneurial elements still obtain in nineteenth-century education. Saint-Simon's 
declaration is characteristic: "I used my money to acquire knowledge. Good 
food, fine wines, much alacrity vis-a-vis the professors, to whom my purse was 
opened — these things procured for me all the opportunities I could desire." Cited 
in Maxime Leroy, La Vie veritable du comte Henri de Saint-Simon (Paris, 1925), 
p. 210. [d3a,3] 

As regards the physiognomy of Romanticism, attention might focus, first of all, 
on the colored lithograph in the Cabinet des Estampes, Sf. 39, vol. 2, which 
undertakes its allegorical representation. [d3a,4] 

Engraving from the Restoration period, showing a crowd gathered before the shop 
of a publisher. A placard announces that the Album pour 18 16 has appeared. 
Caption: "Everything new is beautiful." Cabinet des Estampes. [d3a,5] 

Lithograph. A poor devil looks on dolefully as a young gentleman signs the picture 
which the former has painted. Title: L'Artiste et I'arnateur duXlX" siecle. Cap- 
tion: "It is by me, seeing that I sign it." Cabinet des Estampes. [d3a,6] 

Lithograph, representing a painter walking along and carrying under his arm two 
long narrow planks, on each of which he has painted various garnishes and ar- 
rangements of meats. Title: Les Arts et la misere < Poverty and the Arts> . "Dedi- 
cated to Messieurs the Pork Butchers." Caption: "The man of art in the toils of his 
trade." Cabinet des Estampes. [d3a,7] 



Jacquot de Mirecourt publishes Alexandre Dumas et Cie, fabrique de romans 
<Alexandre Dumas and Co., Manufactory of Novels) (Paris, 1845). [d3a,8] 




L'Artiste et I'mnateur du dix-neuvibne siecle (The Artist and the Amateur of the Nineteenth 
Century), Courtesy of the Bibliotheque Nationale de France. See d3a,6. 

Dumas perc. "In September 1846, Minister Salvandy proposed to him that he 
travel to Algeria and write a book about the colony. . . . Dumas, . . . who was read 
by live million Frenchmen at the very least, would give some fifty or sixty thousand 
of them a taste for colonialism. . . . Salvandy offered 10,000 francs to cover the 
cost of the voyage; Alexandre demanded, in addition to this, ... a state vessel. . . . 
Why had the Veloce, which was charged with picking up freed prisoners in Melilla, 
gone to Cadiz . . . ? Members of Parliament seized on the incident. And M. de 



Castellane pointedly questioned the logic of entrusting a scientifi c mission ... to a 5j 
journalistic entrepreneur: the French flag had debased itself in granting 'that ^ 
fellow' its protection; 40,000 francs had been spent for no reason, and the ridicule 
was clearly audible on all sides." The affair ended in Dumas' favor after his ^ 
challenge to a duel was declined by Castellane. J. Lucas-Dubreton, La Vie d'Alex- 
andre Dumas pere (Paris <1928>), pp. 146, 148-149. [d4,i] ^ 

? 

Alexandre Dumas in 1848. "His proclamations . . . are . . . astonishing. In one of -3 
them, addressed to the working people of Paris, he enumerates his 'works for 
workers,' and proves, by citing figures, that in twenty years he has composed four °§ 
hundred novels and thirty-five plays, which have enabled him to provide a living 
for 8,160 persons, including typesetters, foremen, machinists, usherettes, and 




L'Homme de I'art dans I'embarras de so7i metier (The Man of Art in the 
Toils of His Trade) . Courtesy of the Bibliotheque Nationale de France. 
See d3a,7 



llllll 





Alexandre Dumas pere, 1855. Photo by Nadar. Courtesy of the Bibliotheque Nationale 
de France. 



professional applauders." J. Lucas-Dubreton, La Vie a" Alexandre Dumas pere 
(Paris), p. 167. [d4,2] 



"The bohemian of 1840 ... is dead and gone. — Did he really exist? I have heard it 
said that he did not. — Whatever the case may he, you could comb through all of 
Paris at the present moment, and not come upon a single example. . . . There are 
certain neighbor hoods, and a very great numher of them, where the bohemian has 
never pitched his tent. . . . The hohemian flourishes along the boulevards, from 
the Rue Montmartre to the Rue de la Paix. . . . Less frequently in the Latin Quar- 
ter, formerly his main ahode. . . . Where does the bohemian come from? Is he a 
product of the social or the natural order? . . . Who is to blame for the develop- 
ment of this species — nature or society? Without hesitation, I answer: nature! . . . 
As long as there are idlers and fops in the world, there will be hohemians." Gabriel 
Guillemot, Le Boheme, in the series entitled Physionomies parisiennes (Paris, 
1869), pp. 11, 18-19, 111-112. Something similar on the griscttes in this series. 

(d4,3] 

It would be useful to trace historically the "theses" of bohemia. The attitude of a 
Maxime Duchamps <Du Camp?>, who holds success to be a proof of the lack of 
artistic quality, stems directly from that which is expressed in the statement, 
"There is nothing beautiful but what is forgotten," which occurs in Lurine's 
Treizihne anondissement de Pans <Paris, 1850>, p. 190. [d4,4] 

The Raf alers' Club (Cercle des Rafales): "No famous names there. Should a mem- 
ber of the Rafalers' stoop so low as to make a name for himself — whether in 
politics, literature, or the arts — he would be mercilessly struck from the list." 
[Taxile Delord,] Paris-Boheme (Paris, 1854), pp. 12-13. [d4,5] 

Victor Hugo's drawings, in his house at 6 Place des Vosges, where he lived from 
1832 to 1848: Dolmen Where the Voice of Shadow Spoke to Me; Ogive; My Destiny (a 
giant wave); The Sail Recedes, the Rock Remains (gloomy rocky seashore; in the 
foreground a sailing ship); Ego Hugo; VH (allegorical monogram); Lacework and 
Specter. A sail with the inscription "Exile" and a tombstone with the inscription 
"France" (pendants, serving as homemade frontispieces, to two of his books); 
Tlxe Borough of Angels; Village in Moonlight; Fracta Sed Invicta (a wreck); a break- 
water; a fountain in an old village, around which all die storms on earth seem to 
have gathered. [d4a,l] 

"We have had novels about handits purified hy imprisonment — the tales of Vau- 
trin and of Jean Valjean; and it was not to stigmatize them . . . that the writers 
evoked these melancholy figures. . . . And it is in a city where 120,000 girls live 
secretly from vice and 100,000 individuals live off girls, it is in a city infested with 
hardened criminals, cutthroats, housebreakers, carriage thieves, shop breakers, 
shoplifters, rahhle rousers, con men, pickpockets, predators, shakedown artists, 
guardian angels, 1 swindlers, and loclcpickers — in a city, I say, where all the wreck- 



age of disorder and vice runs aground, and where the slightest spark can set fire to 
the suhlimated populace, it is here that this corrupting literature — . . . Les 
Mysteres cle Paris, Rocambole, and Les Miserables — is produced." Charles 
Louandre, Les Iclees subversives cle notre temps (Paris, 1872), pp. 35-37. [d4a,2] 

"The incomplete copy in the Bibliotheque Nationale is sufficient for us to judge of 
the holdness and novelty of the pro ject conceived hy Balzac. . . . he Feuilleton cles 
journaux politiqu.es aimed at nothing less than the elimination of booksellers. 
Directsale from publisher to purchaser was the plan ... by which everyone would 
benefit — the publisher and the author hy making a profit, the purchaser hy paying 
less for hooks. This arrangement . . . met with no success at all, douhtless because 
the booksellers were against it." Louis Lumet, introduction to Honore de Balzac, 
Critique litteraire (Paris, 1912), p. 10. [d4a,3] 

The three short-lived periodicals founded hy Balzac: he Feuilleton cles journaux 
politiques (1830), La Chronique cle Paris (1836-1837), La Revue pcirisienne 
(1840). [d4a,4] 

"Recollection has value only as prediction. Thus, history should he classed as a 
science: practical application constantly proves its utility." Honore de Balzac, 
Critique litteraire, introduction by Louis Lumet (Paris, 1912), p. 117 (review of 
Les Deux Fous, by P. L. Jacoh, hihliophile). [d4a,5] 

"It is not by telling the poor to cease imitating the luxury of the rich that one will 
make the lower class happier. It is not hy telling girls to stop permitting themselves 
to he seduced that one will suppress prostitution. We might as well tell them, 
'. . . When you have no hread, you will he so good as to cease being hungry.' But 
Christian charity, it will be said, is there to cure all these evils. To which we reply: 
Christian charity cures very little and prevents nothing at all." Honore de Balzac, 
Critique litteraire, introduction hy Louis Lumet (Paris, 1912), p. 131 (review of Le 
Pretre [Paris, 1830]). [d5,l] 

"In 1750, no hook — not even L'Esprit cles lois 1 — reached more than three or four 
thousand people. ... In our day, some thirty thousand copies of Lamartine's Pre- 
mieres meditations and some sixty thousand books hy Beranger have heen sold 
over the past ten years. Thirty thousand volumes of Voltaire, Montesquieu, and 
Moliere have enlightened men's minds." Balzac, Critique litteraire, introduction 
by Louis Lnmet (Paris, 1912), p. 29 ("De l'Etat actnel de la lihrairie" <On the 
Current State of the Bookstore>, sample from Le Feuilleton cles journaux poli- 
tiques, published in L'Universel, March 22-23, 1830). [d5,2] 

Victor Hugo hearkens to the inner voice of the crowd of his ancestors: "The crowd 
to which he listened admiringly in himself, and which he heard as the herald of his 
popularity, inclined him, in fact, toward the exterior crowd — toward the Iclola 
Fori,' toward the inorganic hody of the masses. . . . He searched in the tumult of 



the sea for the roar of applause." "He spent fifty years draping his love of confu- 
sion — of all confusion, provided it was rhythmic — in his love for the people." Leon 
Daudet, Les Oeuvres dans les homines (Paris, 1922), pp. 47-48, 11. [d5,3] 



A saying of Vacquerie's ahout Victor Hugo: "The towers of Notre Dame were the H 
of his name." Cited in Leon Daudet, Les Oeuvres dans les hoinmes (Paris, 1922), 



Victor Hugo in a letter to Baudelaire — with particular reference to "Les Sept 
Vieillards" and "Les Petites Vieilles" (both poems were dedicated to Hugo, and, as 
Baudelaire indicated to Poulet-Malassis, for the second of them Hugo's work 
served as the poet's model): "You have endowed the sky of art with an indescrib- 
able macabre gleam. You have created a new frisson." 6 Cited in Louis Barthou, 
Autour de Baudelaire (Paris, 1917), p. 42 ("Victor Hugo et Baudelaire"). [d5,6] 

Maxime Leroy, Les Premiers Amis frangcris de Wagner, suggests that a revolutionary 
impulse played a very large part in Baudelaire's enthusiasm for Wagner; indeed, 
Wagner's works inspired an anhfeudal Fronde. The fact that his operas dis- 
pensed with ballet infuriated habitues of the Opera. [d5,7] 

From Baudelaire's essay on Pierre Dupont: "We had been waiting so many years 
for some solid, real poetry ! Whatever the party to which one belongs, whatever the 
prejudices one has inherited, it is impossible not to be moved by the sight of that 
sickly throng breathing the dust of the workshops, swallowing lint, becoming satu- 
rated with white lead, mercury, and all the poisons necessary to the creation of 
masterpieces, sleeping among vermin in the heart of districts where the humblest 
and greatest virtues live side by side with the most hardened vices and with the 
dregs from prisons. That sighing and languishing throng to which the earth owes 
its marvels, which feels flowing in its veins an ardent red blood, which looks long 
and sadly at the sunshine and shade of the great parks and, for its only comfort 
and consolation, bawls at the top of its voice its song of salvation: Let us love one 
another . . ." — "There will come a time when the accents of this workingman's 
Marseillaise will circulate like a Masonic password, and when the exiled, the aban- 
doned, and the lost, whether under the devouring tropical sky or in the snowy 
wilderness, will be able to say, T have nothing more to fear — I am in France!' as he 
hears this virile melody perfume the air with its primordial fragrance: 'Nous dont 
la lampe le matin / Au clairon du coq se rallume, / Nous tous qu'un salaire incer- 
tain / Ramene avant l'aube a l'enchime . . ." — On the "Chant des ouvriers": 
"When I heard that wonderful cry of melancholy and sorrow, I was awed and 
moved." 7 Cited in Maxime Leroy, Les Premiers Amis francais de Wagner (Paris 



p. 8. 



[d5,4] 



Renouvier wrote a book on Victor Hugo's philosophy. 



[d5,5] 



<1925>),pp. 51-53, 51. 



[d5a,l] 



On Victor Hugo: "He placed the ballot box on turning tables." Edmond Jaloux, 



"Eugene Sue . . . was in certain respects . . . similar to Schiller — not only in his 
preference for tales of crime, for colportage, for black-and-white depictions, but 
also in his predilection for ethical and social issues. . . . Balzac and Hugo viewed 
him as a competitor." Egon Friedell, Kulturgeschichte der Neuzeit, vol. 3 (Mu- 
nich, 1931), p. 149. Foreigners, such as Rellstab, sought out the Rue aux Feves, 
where Les Mysteres de Paris was begun. [d5a,3] 

On Victor Hugo: "This Ancient, this unique genius, this unique pagan, this man of 
unparalleled genius was ravaged by, at the very least, a double politician: a politi- 
cal politician that made him a democrat, and a literary politician that made him a 
Romantic. This genius was corrupted by talent(s)." Charles Peguy, Oeuvres com- 
pletes, 1873-1914: Oeuvres de prose (Paris, 1916), p. 383 ("Victor-Marie, comte 



Apropos of Victor Hugo, Baudelaire "believed in the coexistence of genius and 
foolishness." Louis Barthou, Autour de Baudelaire (Paris, 1916), p. 44 ("Victor 
Hugo et Baudelaire"). Similarly, before the planned banquet for the tercentenary 
of Shakespeare's hirthday (April 23, 1864), he speaks of the "book by Victor Hugo 
on Shakespeare, a book which — full of beauties and stupidities like all his books — 
is almost certain to vex even the most ardent of his admirers" (cited in Barthou, 
p. 50). And: "Hugo, priestlike, with his head always bent — too bent to see any- 
thing except his navel" (cited in Barthou, p . 57) . K [d6,2] 

The publishers of Balzac's Feuilleton des journaux politiques offered certain 
books at lower-than-official prices by bypassing book retailers. Balzac himself 
takes pride in this initiative, which he defends against criticisms from without, and 
which he expects will create the immediate bond between publisher and public that 
was his aim. In a sample issue of the newspaper, Balzac sketches the history of the 
book trade and of publishing since the Revolution of 1789, to conclude with the 
demand: "We must finally see to it that a volume is produced exactly like a loaf of 
hread, and is sold like a loaf of bread, so that there would be no intermediary 
between an author and a purchaser other than the bookseller. Then this business 
will be the most secure of all. . . . When a bookseller is required to lay out some 
twelve thousand francs for every project, he will no longer engage in any that are 
risky or ill-conceived. They will realize, then, that instruction is a necessity of 
their profession. A clerk who has learned in what year Gutenberg printed the 
Bihle will no longer imagine that being a bookseller is only a matter of having one's 
name written over a shop." Honore de Balzac, Critique litteraire, introduction by 
Louis Lumet (Paris, 1912), pp. 34-35. [d6,3J 



L'Homme du XIX'' siecle," Le Temps, August 9, 1935. 



[d5a,2] 



Hugo"). 



[d6,l] 



Pelin publishes the letter of a publisher who declares himself ready to buy the 
manuscript of an author on the condition that he can publish it under the name of 



some other author of his choosing ("on the condition . . . that it he signed by 
someone whose name would be, according to my calculations, a spur to success"). 
Gabriel Pelin, Les Laicleurs clu beau Paris (Paris, 1861), pp. 98-99. [d6,4] 

Fees. Victor Hugo receives 300,000 francs from Lacroix for Les Muerables, in 
exchange for rights to the novel for twelve years. "It was the first time Victor 
Hugo had received such a sum. 'In twenty-eight years of furious labor,' Paul 
Souday has said, 'with an oeuvre of thirty-one volumes . . . , he had made a total 
of about 553,000 francs. ... He never earned as much as Lamartine, Scribe, or 
Dumas pere. . . .' Lamartine, in the years 1838 to 1851, made close to five million 
francs, of which 600,000 were for the His torn des Girondi?is. n Edmond Benoit- 
Levy "Les Muerables" de Victor Hugo (Paris, 1929), p. 108. Connection between 
income and political aspiration. [d6a,l] 

"When Eugene Sue, following upon . . . Les Mysteres de Londres <by Paul 
Fevab , . . . conceived the project of writing Les Mysteres de Paris, he did not at all 
propose to arouse the interest of the reader with a description of society's under- 
world. He began by characterizing his novel as an histoiref antastique. ... It was 
a newspaper article that decided his future. La Phalange praised the beginning of 
the novel and opened the author's eyes: 'M. Sue has just set out on the most 
penetrating critique of society. . . . Let us congratulate him for having recounted 
. . . the frightful sufferings of the working class and the cruel indifference of soci- 
ety.' The author of this article . . . received a visitfrom Sue; they talked — and that 
is how the novel already underway was pointed in a new direction. . . . Eugene Sue 
convinced himself: he took part in the electoral hattle and was elected . . . 
(1848). . . . The tendencies and the far-reaching effects of Sue's novels were such 
that M. Alfred Nettement could see in them one of the determining causes of the 
Revolution of 1848." Edmond Benoit-Levy, "Les Miserables" de Victor Hugo 
(Paris, 1929), pp. 18-19. [d6a,2] 

A Saint-Simonian poem dedicated to Sue as the author of Les Mysteres de Paris: 
Savinien Lapointe, "De Mon Echoppe" <My Workshop) ,* in line Voix d'en bas 
(Paris, 1844), pp. 283-296. [d6a,3] 

"After 1852, the defenders of the educator's art are much less numerous. The most 
important is Maxime Du Camp." C. L. de Liefde, Le Saint-Simonisme dans la 
poesief ranqaise <Haarlem, 1927 >, p. 115. [d6a,4] 

"Les Jesuites, by Michelet and Quinet, dates from 1843. (Le Juif errant <The 
Wandering Jew> appeared in 1844)." Charles Brim, Le Roman social en France 
m.u XIX* siecle (Paris, 1910), p. 102. [d6a,5] 



"Le Constitutionnel going from 3,600 subscribers to more than 20,000 . . . 128,074 
votes giving Eugene Sue an electoral mandate to become a deputy." Charles Brun, 
Le Roman social en France au XIX' siecle (Paris, 1910), p. 105. [d6a,6] 



The novels of George Sand led to an increase in the number of divorces, nearly 
all of which were initiated by the wife. The author carried on a large correspon- 
dence in which she functioned as an adviser to women. [d6a,7] 

Poor, but cleanly — is the philistine echo of a chapter title in Les Miserables: "La 
Boue, mais Fame" <Mire, but Soul>. 10 [d7,l] 

Balzac: "Mutual education produces 100-sous pieces made of human flesh. Indi- 
viduals disappear in a population leveled by instruction." Cited in Charles Brim, 
he Roman social en France au XIX" siecle (Paris, 1910), p. 120. [d7,2] 

Mirbeau and Natansou, he Foyer <The Hearth) (1, 4), Baron Courtin: "It is not 
desirable that education should be extended any further. . . . For education is the 
heginning of ease, and ease is not within everyone's reach." Cited in Charles Brim, 
he Roman social en France au XIX' siecle (Paris, 1910), p. 125. Mirheau merely 
repeats here, in satirical vein, a saying of Thiers <cited in dl,l > . [d7,3] 

"Balzac — unbridled romantic by virtue of the lyrical tirades, the hold simplifica- 
tion of characters, and the complication of plot — is at the same time a realist hy 
virtue of the evocation of place and social milieu, and a naturalist by virtue of his 
taste for vulgarity and his scientific pretensions." Charles Brun, he Roman social 
en France au XIX ! siecle (Paris, 1910), p . 129. [d7,4] 

Napoleon's influence on Balzac, the Napoleonic in him. "The spirit and mettle of 
the Grande Armee in the form of greed, amhition, and dehauchery: Grandet, 
Nucingen, Philippe Bridau, or Savarus." 11 Charles Brun, he Roman social en 
France au XIX' siecle (Paris, 1910), p. 151. [d7,5] 

"Balzac . . . quotes as authorities . . . Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire and Cuvier." Charles 
Bruu, he Roman social (Paris, 1910), p. 154. [d7,6] 

Lamartine and Napoleon. "In Les Destinies de la poesie, in 1834, he speaks of . . . 
his contempt for this age ... of calculation and power, of numhers and the 
sword. ... It was the age in which Esmenard sang the praises of navigation, Gudin 
of astronomy, Ricard of spheres, Aime Martin of physics and chemistry. . . . La- 
martine said it very well: 'Number alone is allowed, honored, protected, and 
recompensed. Since numher does not think, since it is an . . . instrument . . . that 
never asks . . . whether it is made to serve the oppression of humankind or its 
deliverance, . . . the military leader of this era wanted no other emissary.'" Jean 
Skerlitch, h'Opinion publique en France d'apres la poesie (Lausanne, 1901), 
p. 65. [d7,7] 



"Romanticism proclaims the liherty of art, the equality of genres, and the frater- 
nity of words (all under one entitlement as citizens of the French language)." 
Georges Renard, ha Methode scientifique de Vhistoire litteraire (Paris, 1900), 



pp. 219-220, cited in Jean Skerlitch, U Opinion publique en France d'apres la 
poesie (Lausanne, 1901), pp. 19-20. [d7,8] 



The magnificent seventh book of the fourth part of Les Miserables, "LArgot ," 
winds up its penetrating and audacious analyses with a gloomy reflection: "Since 
'89, the entire people has been expanding in the sublimated individual; there is 
no poor man who, having bis rights, has not bis ray; the starving man feels 
within himself the honor of France; the dignity of the citizen is an interior armor; 
he who is free is scrupulous; he who votes reigns." Victor Hugo, Oeiwres com- 
pletes, novels, vol. 8 (Paris, 1881), p. 306 {Les Miserables)} 2 [d7a,l] 

Nettement on the digressions in Les Miserables: "These hits of philosophy, of 
history, of social economy are like cold-water taps that douse the frozen and 
discouraged reader. It is hydrotherapy applied to literature." Alfred Nettement, 
he Roman contemporain (Paris, 1864), p. 364. . [d7a,2] 

"M. Sue, in Le Juif errant, hurls insults at religion ... in order to serve the 
antipathies of Le Constitutionnel. . . . M. Dumas, in La Dame de Monsoreau, 
heaps scorn on royalty ... to accommodate the passions of this same newspa- 
per, . . . while in La Reine Margot he conforms to the taste of the gilded youth at 
La Presse for . . . risque paintings, . . . and . . . in Le Comte de Monte-Cristo he 
deifies money and inveighs against the Restoration to please the world of civil 
servants who congregated around Le Journal des debuts.'''' Alfred Nettement, 
Etudes critiques sur lefeuilleton-roman, vol. 2 (Paris, 1846), p. 409. [d7a,3] 

Victor Hugo: owing to a law of his poetic nature, he has to stamp every thought 
with the form of an apotheosis. [d7a ,4] 

A wide-ranging remark by Drumont: "Almost all the leaders of the movement of 
the school of 1830 had the same sort of constitution: high-strung, prolific, enam- 
ored of the grandiose. Whether it was a matter of reviving the epic on canvas, as 
with Delacroix, of portraying a whole society, as with Balzac, or of putting four 
thousand years of the life of Humanity into a novel, like Dumas, all . . . were 
possessed of shoulders that did not shrink from the burden." Edouard Drumont, 
Les Hems et les pitres (Paris <1900>), pp. 107-108 ("Alexandre Dumas pere"). 

[d7a,5] 

'"For the past fifty years,' said Doctor Demarquay to Dumas fils one day, 'all our 
morihund patients have died with one of your father's novels under their pillow." 1 
Edouard Drumont, Les Heros et les pitres (Paris <1900>), p. 106 ("Alexandre 
Dumas pere"). [d7a,6] 

In the preface to Les Pay sans, Balzac speaks reproachfully of the year 1830, 
"which did not rememher that Napoleon had preferred to risk failure rather than 



arm the masses." Cited in Ch. Calippe, Balzac: Ses Idees sociales (Reims and 
Paris <1906>), p. 94. [d7a,7] 



"Bourget has remarked that Balzac's characters . . . appeared in real life even 
more frequently after the death of the novelist: 'Balzac,' he says, 'seems less to 
have ohserved the society of his age than to have contributed to the formation of 
an age. Certain of his characters were more true-to-life in 1860 than in 1835.' 
Nothing more just: Balzac deserves to he classed among anticipators of the lirst 
order. . . . Thirty years later, reality arrived on the terrain that his intuition had 
already crossed in a single hound." H. Clouzot and R.-H. Valensi, Le Paris de la 
Comedie humaine (Paris, 1926), p. 5 ("Balzac et ses fournisseurs"). [d8,l] 

Drumont, too, inclines to the view that Balzac's gift was a prophetic one. Occa- 
sionally, however, he reverses the terms of the equation: "The people of the Second 
Empire wanted to he characters from Balzac." Edouard Drumont, Figures de 
bronze ou statues de neige (Paris < 1900>), p. 48 ("Balzac"). [d8,2] 



Balzac, speaking through his country doctor: "The proletarians seem to me to he 
the minors of the nation, and should always remain in a state of tutelage." 11 Cited 
in Ahhe Charles Calippe, Balzac: Ses Idees sociales (Reims and Paris <1906>), 
p. 50. [d8,3] 

Balzac (like Le Play) was opposed to the parceling out of large estates: "My God, 
how could anyone fail to realize that the wonders of art are impossible in a 
country without great fortunes!" (cited in Charles Calippe, p. 36). Balzac likewise 
draws attention to the disadvantages that result when peasants and petty bour- 
geois hoard their money, and calculates how many billions are in this way with- 
drawn from circulation. On the other hand, the only remedy he can recommend 
is for the individual, by hard work and wise economy, to become a landed 
proprietor himself. He thus moves within contradictions. [d8,4] 

George Sand hecame acquainted with Agricol Perdiguier in 1840. She says: "I was 
struck hy the moral importance of the topic, and I wrote the novel Le Compagnon 
du tour de France out of sincerely progressive ideas." Cited in Charles Benoist, 
"L' Homme de 1848," part 2, Revue des deux mondes (February 1, 1914), pp. 
665-666. [d8,5] 

Dumas pere occupied almost simultaneously, with three of his novels, the fcuille- 
ton sections of La Presse, Le Constitutionnel, and Le Journal des debuts. [d8,6] 

Nettement on the style of Dumas pere: "It is usually natural and relatively rapid, 
hut it lacks force because the thought it expresses does not go very deep. It is to the 
style of great writers what lithography is to engraving." Alfred Netlement, Histoire 
de la litter ature franqaise sous le Gouvernement de Juillet (Paris, 1859), vol. 2, 
pp. 306-307. [d8,7] 



Sue, compared with George Sand: "Once again we have a protest against the state 
of society, but, this time, a collective protest . . . undertaken in the name of the 
passions and interests of the largest classes of society." Alfred Nettement, Histoire 
de la litter attire franqaise sous le Gouvemement de Juillet (Paris, 1859), vol. 2, 
p. 322. [d8a,l] 

Nettement points out that Sue's novels, which sought to undermine the July Mon- 
archy, were published in newspapers, (Le Journal des debuts and Le Constitution- 
nel) that were on its side. [d8a,2] 

Regular customers at the brasserie on the Rue des Martyrs: Delvau, Murger, 
Dupont, Malassis, Baudelaire, Guys. [d8a,3] 

Jules Bertaut sees Balzac's importance in terms of the action of significant figures 
in a milieu determined by the types of that day's society — which is to say, in terms 
of character study permeated by the study of manners. Apropos of the latter, he 
writes: "One need only peruse the innumerable physiologies ... to see how far this 
literary vogue has come. From the Schoolboy to the Stockbroker, and taking 
account of the Dry Nurse, the Sergeant, and the Seller of Countermarks in be- 
tween, it is an endless succession of petits portraits. . . . Balzac knows the genre 
well; he has cultivated it. Small wonder, then, that he seeks to give us, through 
these means, the picture of an entire society." Jules Bertaut, "Le Pere Goriot" de 
Balzac (Amiens, 1928), pp. 117-118. [d8a,4] 

'"Victor Hugo,' says Eugene Spuller, 'had gone along with the views of the reac- 
tionaries. . . . He had consistently voted on the right.' ... As for the question of 
the national workshops, on June 20, 1848, he declares them a double error — from 
a political as well as a financial standpoint. ... In the Legislative Assembly, on the 
other hand, he turns to the left, becoming one of its . . . most aggressive orators. Is 
this because of an evolution . . . , or is it due to wounded pride and personal 
bitterness against Louis Napoleon, under whom he supposedly wished — even ex- 
pected — to become minister of public instruction?" E . Meyer, Victor Hugo a la 
tribune (Chambery, 1927), pp. 2, 5, 7; cited in Eugene Spuller, Histoire parlemen- 
taire de la Seconde Republique, pp. Ill, 266. [d8a,5] 

"A discussion having opened between Le Bon-Sens and La Presse over the ques- 
tion of Girardin's forty-franc newspapers, Le National intervened. Because La 
Presse had taken this opportunity to mount a personal attack on M. Carrel, an 
encounter tookplace between the latter and the editor-in-chief of La Presse. " — "It 
was the political press that fell, in the person of Carrel, before the industrial 
press." Alfred Nettement, Histoire de la litterature franqaise sous le Gouveme- 
ment de Juillet (Paris, 1859), vol. 1 , p. 254. [d8a,6] 



"Communism, . . . that . . . logic of democracy, is already boldly attacking society 
in its moral assumptions, whence it is evident that the proletarian Samson, grown 



prudent, will henceforth sap the pillars of society in the cellar, instead of shaking 
them in the hanquet hall." Balzac, Les Paysans; 1 ' 1 (cited in Abbe Charles Calippe, 
Balzac: Ses Idees sociales (Reims and Paris <1906>), p. 108. [d9,l] 



Travel literature: "It is France that first . . . reinforced its armies with a brigade of 
geographers, naturalists, and archaeologists. The great achievements in Egypt . . . 
marked the advent of an order of works previously unknown. . . . The Expedition 
scientifique de la Moree and the Exploration scientifique de VAlgerie are worthy 
additions to this great line. . . . Whether scientific in spirit, serious or light, . . . 
accounts by travelers . . . have, in our time, found a considerable vogue. Along 
with novels, they form the staple fare in reading rooms, numbering, on average, 
some eighty works per year, or twelve hundred publications in fifteen years." 
This, on average, is not much more than in other fields of natural science. Charles 
Louandre, "Statistiquelitteraire: De la Production intellectuelle en France depuis 
quinze ans," Revue des deux mondes (November 1, 1847), pp. 425-426. [d9,2] 



From 1835 on, the average number of novels produced annually is 210 — approxi- 
mately the same as the number of vaudeville productions. [d9,3] 

Travel literature. It finds an unexpected application during the Chamber's debate 
on deportations (April 4, 1849). "Farconet, who was the first to oppose the proj- 
ect, brought up the question of the salubrity of the Marquesas Islands. . . . The 
member who had presented the report replied by reading some travel accounts 
which depicted the Marquesas as ... a veritable paradise. . . . This, in turn, drew 
. . . the angry response: 'To offer idylls and bucolics on a subject so grave is 
ridiculous."' E. Meyer, Victor Hugo * la tribune (Chambery, 1927), p. 60. [d9,4] 

The idea for La Comedie humaine came to Balzac in 1833 (the year in which Le 
Medecin de campagne was published). The influence of Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire's 
theory of types was decisive. To this was added, on the literary side, the influence 
of Scott's and Cooper's cycles of novels. [d9,5] 

In its second year of publication, in 1851, the "Almanack des reformateurs . . . , 
in which the government is presented as a necessary evil, brings together the 
expose of communist doctrine with verse translations of Martial and Horace, with 
sidelights on astronomy and medicine, and with all sorts of useful tips." Charles 
Benoist, "Le 'My the' de la classe ouvriere," Revue des deux mondes (March 1, 
1914), p. 91. [d9,6] 

Derivation of the feuilleton novel, whose appearance in newspapers immediately 
entailed dangerous competition for periodicals and a marked decline in the pro- 
duction of literary criticism. The periodicals, in turn, had to decide whether to 
publish novels in installments. The first to do so were La Revue de Paris (edited by 
V&ron?) and La Revue des deux mondes. "Under the old state of affairs, a journal 
with a subscription rate exceeding eighty francs was supported by those whose 



political convictions it expressed. . . . Under the new arrangements, a journal had 
to live by advertisements, . . . and in order to have lots of advertisements, the 
fourth page, which had become a publicity display, had to pass before the eyes of 
a great many subscribers. In order to have lots of subscribers, some bait had to be 
found that would speak to all opinions at the same time, and that would substi- 
tute, for political interest, an item of general interest. . . . This is how, by starting 
from the forty-franc newspaper and proceeding on to the advertisement, we 
arrive, almost inevitably, at the serial novel." Alfred Nettement, Histoire de la 
litterature francaise sous k Gouvemement de Quillet (Paris, 1859), vol. 1, pp. 301- 
302. [d9a,l] 

Sometimes, in publishing a novel in serial form, one would leave out part of the 
work in order to get the newspaper-reading public to buy the book. [d9a,2] 

In the editor's preface to Journet's Poesies et chants harmoniens, Uncle Tom's Cabin, 
by Harriet Beecher Stowe, is quite appropriately placed on an equal footing with 
Les Mysteres de Paris and Les Muerables. [d9a,3] 

"From time to time, one could read, in he Journal des debuts, articles by 
M. Michel Chevalier or M. Philarete Chasles, . . . articles of a socially progressive 
tendency. . . . The progressive articles in the Debuts were customarily published 
during the fortnight preceding subscription renewals, which occurred every four 
months. On the eve of large renewals, he Journal des debuts could be found 
flirting with radicalism. This helps to explain how he Journal des debuts could 
undertake the hold publication of Les Mysteres de Paris . . . — but this time, that 
imprudent newspaper had gone further than it realized. As a consequence, many 
wealthy bankers withdrew their support for the Debuts ... in order to found a 
new paper, . . . Le Globe. This worthy predecessor of L 'Epoque . . . was aimed at 
doing justice to the incendiary theories of M. Eugene Sue and of Lu Democrutie 
pucijique." A. Toussenel, Les Juifs, rois de Vepoque, ed. Gonet (Paris <1886>), 
vol. 2, pp. 23-24, [d9a,4] 

The boheme. "With Un Prince de la boheme (1840), Balzac wanted to portray a 
. . . characteristic of this nascent boheme. The amorous preoccupations ... of 
Rusticoli de la Palferine are only a Balzacian expansion upon the triumphs of 
Marcel and Rodolphe, l;> which would soon follow. . . . This novel contains a gran- 
diloquent delinition of hohemianism, . . . the first . . . : 'The boheme — what 
should he called the doctrine of the Boulevard des Italiens — consists of young 
people, ... all men of genius in their way, men as yet little known, but soon to 
become known. . . . Here one meets writers, administrators, soldiers, journalists, 
artists! If the emperor of Russia purchased this bohemia for twenty million 
francs, . . . and if it were subsequently deported to Odessa, then in a year Odessa 
would be Paris.' . . . During this same period, George Sand . . . and Alphonse 
Karr . . . initiated bohemian circles. . . . But these were imaginary bohemias; and 
that of Balzac was entirely fantastic. The hohemianism of Theophile Gautier, on 



the other hand, and that of Murger, have been talked about so much . . . that 
today we can get an idea of what they were. To tell the truth, Gautier and his 
friends . . . did not realize right away, in 1833, that they were bohemians; they 
were content with calling themselves Meune France' <Young France) .... Their 
poverty was merely relative. . . . This hohemianism . . . was the boheme galante; it 
could just as well be called gilded boheinianism, the boheme doree. . . . Ten or 
fifteen years later, around 1843, there was a new bohemia . . . , the true boheme. 
Theophile Gautier, Gerard de Nerval, Arsene Houssaye were then approaching 
forty; Murger and his friends were not yet twenty-five. This time, it was a genuine 
intellectual proletariat. Murger was the son of a concierge tailor; Champfleury's 
father was a secretary at the town hall in Laon; . . . Delvau's father was a tanner in 
the Faubourg Saint-Marcel; Courbet's family were quasi-peasants. . . . Champ- 
fleury and Chintreuil wrapped packages in a bookstore; Bonvin was a working- 
class typographer." Pierre Martino, he Roman realiste sous le Second Empire 
(Paris, 1913), pp. 6-9. [dlO.l] 

In the early 1840s, there was a copying process known as the Rageneau press, 
evidently based on lithography. [dl0,2] 

Firmin Maillard, La Cite des intellectuek (Paris <1905>), pp. 92-99, offers an 
abundance of information ahout author's fees. [dl0,3] 

"Balzac . . . compared his critique of Parisian journalism to Moliere's attacks on 
financiers, marquis, and doctors." Ernst Robert Curtius, Balzac (Bonn, 1923), 
pp. 354-355. [dl0,4] 

On Balzac: 'What enahles us to say that he was perhaps not very truthful after 
1820 is the often expressed view that he wondrously painted in advance, and 
prophesied, the society of the Second Empire." Edmond Jaloux, "Les Romanciers 
etle temps," Le Temps, December 27, 1935. [dl0,5] 

From Lamartine's "Lettre en vers a M. Alphonse Karr": 

Every man can proudly sell the sweat of his brow; 
I sell my bunch of grapes as you do your flowers, 
Happy when its nectar, under the crush of my foot , 
Flows in amber streams through all my works, 
Producing for its master, drunk with its high price, 
Much gold with which to buy much freedom! 
Fate has reduced us to counting »ur wages; 
Day-wages you, night-wages me: two mercenaries. 
But bread well earned is bread well broken, too: 
0 the glory of freemen beholden to none for their salt! 

Veuillot, who cites this text, has this to say: "Until now, it was felt that the freedom 
that can he purchased with money is not the sort that men of conscience are in the 
habit of pursuing. . . . What! . . . You don't know that the way to be free is to heap 



scorn on gold? To secure this freedom acquired through gold, . . . you produce 
your hooks in the same mercenary fashion as you produce vegetables and wine. 
You will demand of your faculties a double or a triple harvest; you will start to 
market your early produce; the muse will no longer visit voluntarily, but will toil 
night and day like a drudge. . . . And in the morning, you will cast before the 
public a page scribbled over in the course of your nocturnal lucubrations; you will 
not even bother rereading the rubbish that covers it, though you will certainly 
have counted the number of lines it contains." Louis Veuillot, Pages choisies, ed. 
Antoine Albalat (Lyons and Paris, 1906), pp. 28, 31-32. (Kan - sold flowers grown 
on his estate near Nice.) [dl0a,l] 

"In vain Sainte-Beuve allows himself, out of a deep-rooted antipathy, to fly into a 
rage against the author of La Comedie humaine. But he is right to observe that 'the 
vogue for serial publication, which required, with each new chapter, that the 
reader be struck a hearty blow, had driven the stylistic effects of the novel to an 
extreme and desperate pitch. Cited in Fernand Baldensperger, "Le Raffermisse- 
ment des techniques <dans la Jitterature occidentale de> 1840," Revue de littera- 
ture comparee, 15, no. 1 (January-March 1935), p. 82. [dl0a,2] 

In reaction to the serial novel, there arose — around 1840 — novellas (Merimee) 
and regional novels (<Barbey> d'Aurevilly) . [dl0a,3] 

Eugene de Mirecourt, Les Vrais Miserables (Paris, 1862), recalls Lamartine's His- 
toire des Girondins and surmises that Hugo wanted to prepare his political career 
with his novel as Lamartine had done with his popular history. [dl0a,4] 

Apropos of Lamartine and Hugo: "Instead of fostering the notion . . . that people 
should follow devotedly in the steps of these sincere souls, we should investigate 
the underside of all sincerity. But bourgeois culture and democracy are too greatly 
in need of this value! The democrat is a man who wears his heart on his sleeve; his 
heart is an excuse, a testimonial, a subterfuge. He is professionally heartwarming, 
so he can dispense with being truthful." N. Guterman and H. Lcfebvre, La Con- 
science mystifiee (Paris <1936>), p. 151 ("Le Chantage etla sincerite" < Blackmail 
and Sincerity >). [d 1 1 , 1 ] 

On Lamartine: "The fatuity of the poet is indescrihable. Lamartine deems himself 
a statesman in the mold of Miraheau, and he boasts (another Turgot!) of having 
labored twenty years in the study of political economy. An eminent thinker, he's 
convinced that he draws up from the depths of his soul ideas that he actually 
catches on the wing and clothes in his own image." Emile Barrault, "Lamartine," 
extract from Le National of March 27, 1869 (Paris, 1869), p. 10. [dl 1 ,2] 



Alfred Delvau (1825-1867): "He was a child of the quartier Mouf'fetard. ... In 
1848, he hecame private secretary to Ledru-Rollin, who was then minister of the 



interior. Events having brusquely removed him from active politics, he devoted 
himself to letters, making his debut with several newspaper articles. . . . In Le 
Journal amusant, Le Figaro, and some other journals, he published articles deal- 
ing mainly with Parisian customs and practices. For some time, at Le Siecle, his 
special assignment was the Paris town council." During the second half of the 
1850s, he was in exile in Belgium, where he had fled to escape a prison sentence 
incurred while he was editor of Le Rabelais. Later, he would endure prosecutions 
for plagiarism. Information in Pierre Larousse, Grand Dictionnaire universel clu 
XIX s siecle, vol. 6 (Paris, 1870), p. 385 (article: "Delvau"). [dl 1 ,3] 

During the reign of Napoleon III, Benjamin Gastineau had already been twice 
deported to Algeria. "Under the Paris Commune, M. Gastineau was named inspec- 
tor of communal libraries. The twentieth council of war, charged with trying his 
case, could fi.nd no evidence of any breach of common law. He was nevertheless 
condemned to deportation in a fortified cell." Pierre Larousse, Grand Diction- 
naire universel du XIX" siecle, vol. 8 (Paris, 1872), p. 1062. — Gastineau had be- 
gun his career as a typesetter. [dl 1,4] 

Pierre Dupont: "The poet, as he says in one of his little poems, 'listens, by turns, 
to the forests and the crowd.' And in fact it is the great rustic symphonies, the 
voices through which nature in its entirety speaks, as well as the clamor, the 
griefs, the aspirations and lamentations of the crowd, that make for his double 
inspiration. The song such as our fathers knew it ... , the drinking song or even 
the simple ballad, is utterly foreign to him." Pierre Larousse, <Grand> Dictionnaire 
universel du XIX' siecle, vol. 6 (Paris, 1870), p. 1413 (article: "Dupont"). Hence, 
with Baudelaire, hatred for Beranger is an element of his love for Dupont. 

[dlla,l] 

Gustave Simon descrihes the scenes that took place in front of Paguerre's hook- 
shop when the second and third parts of Les Miserables were delivered: '"On May 
15, 1862,' he writes, 'a little before 6:00 in the morning, a dense crowd was gather- 
ing on the Rue de Seine before a shop that was still closed. The crowd kept growing 
larger and, impatient with waiting, hecame noisy, even riotous. . . . The pavement 
was obstructed by an impassable jumble of delivery carts, private carriages, cabs, 
carioles, and even wheelbarrows. People had empty baskets on their hacks. ... It 
was not yet 6:30 when the crowd, hecoming more unruly by the minute, started 
pushing against the shopfront, while those in the vanguard knocked with redou- 
bled force on the door. Suddenly, a window was opened on the second floor; a lady 
appeared and exhorted the assemhled citizens to be more patient. . . . The shop to 
which they were preparing to lay siege was quite inoffensive; only hooks were sold 
there. It was Paguerre's hookshop. The people hurling themselves at the building 
were bookstore clerks, agents, huyers, and hrokers. The lady who spoke from her 
second-floor window was Madame Paguerre. '" Alhert de Besancourt, Les Pam- 
phlets contre Victor Hugo (Paris), pp. 227-228; cited in Gustave Simon, "Les 



Origines des Miser ablest in ha Revue de Paris, and in letters about the hook 
which Simon published in La Revue). [dlla,2] 



Perrot de Chezelles, in his pamphlet "Examen dn livre des Miserables de M. Victor 
Hugo" (Paris, 1863), makes this more general contribution to the characterization 
of Victor Hugo: "In his dramas and novels he takes for his heroes a lackey like Kuy 
Bias, a courtesan like Marion Delorme, physically deformed beings like Trihoulet 
and Quasimodo, a prostitute like Fantine, a convict like Jean Valjean. ""' Cited in 
Albert de Besancourt, Les Pamphlets contre V.H. (Paris), p. 243. [dlla,3] 

Les Miserables depends, for its principal facts, on actual events. Underlying the 
condemnation of Jean Valjean is a case in which a man who had stolen a loaf of 
bread for his sister's children was condemned to five years' penal servitude. 
Hugo documented such things with great exactitude. [dl2,l] 

A detailed representation of Lamartine's behavior during the February Revolu- 
tion is provided hy Pokrowski in an article that hases itself, in part, on diplomatic 
reports hy Kisseliov, the Russian andjassador to Paris at that time. These reports 
are cited in the course of the article. '"Lamartine . . . admitted,' Kisseliov writes, 
'that, for the time heing, France found itself in a situation that always tends to 
arise when one government has just fallen and the other is not yet firmly in place. 
He added, however, that the population had given proof of so innch good sense, of 
such respect for family and property, that lawful order in Paris would be pre- 
served through the momentum of things in themselves and through the good will of 
the masses. ... In eight or ten days, continued Lamartine, a national guard of 
200,000 men would be organized, in addition to which there were 15,000 mounted 
police, whose spirits were excellent, and 20,000 front-line troops, who already had 
encircled Paris and were to march on the city. ' Here we must pause for a moment. 
It is well known that the pretext for recalling the troops, which since Fehruary had 
heen stationed at a distance from Paris, was the workers' demonstration of April 
16; the conversation between Lamartine and Kisseliov, however, took place on 
/Vpril 6. How hrilliantly, therefore, Marx divined (in Die Klassenkampfe in Frank- 
reich) that the demonstration was provoked solely in order to he able to call hack 
into the capital the most 'reliable' part of the 'forces of order.' . . . But let us go 
further. 'These masses, says Lamartine [that is, the hourgeois national guard, the 
mobile guard, and the line infantry — M.N. P.], will keep in check the cluh fanatics, 
who depend on a few thousand hooligans and criminal elements (!), and will nip 
every excess ... in the hud.'" M. N. Pokrowski, Historische Aufsdtze (Vienna and 
Berlin < 1928>), pp. 108-109 ("Lamartine, Cavaignac und Nikolaus I"). [dl2,2] 

On the sixth of April, a directive went out from Nesselrode in Petershurg to Kis- 
seliov: "Nicholas and his chancellor did not conceal from their agent the fact that 
they needed the alliance with France against Germany — against the new red Ger- 
many that was beginning, with its revolutionary colors, to outshine the France 



which had already come rather far on the road to reason." M. N. Pokrowski, 
Historische Aufsitze (Vienna and Berlin), p. 112. [dl2,3] 



Michelet on Lamar tine: "He glides on his great wing, rapid and oblivious." Cited 
in Jacques Boulenger, "Le Magie de Michelet," Le Temps, May 15, 1936. [dl2a,l] 

"A shrewd observer remarked, one day, that fascist Italy was being run like a large 
newspaper and, moreover, by a great journalist: one idea per day, with sidelights 
and sensations, and with an adroit and insistent orientation of the reader toward 
certain inordinately enlarged aspects of social life — a systematic deformation of 
the understanding of the reader for certain practical ends. The long and the short 
of it is that fascist regimes are publicity regimes." Jean de Lignieres, "Le Cen- 
tenaire de La Presse," Vendredi, June 1936. [dl2a,2] 

"Balzac was one of the collaborators on La Presse . . . , and Girardin was for him 
one of the best guides to the society in which the great man lived." Jean de Lig- 
nieres, "Le Centenaire de La Presse,'''' Vendredi, June 1936. [dl2a,3] 

"In general, the various currents of Realism between 1850 and 1860, that of 
Champfleury like that of Flaubert, are considered 'the school of Balzac.'" Ernst 
Robert Curtius, Balzac (Bonn, 1923), p. 487. [dl2a,4] 

"Modern mass production destroys the sense of art, and the sense of work, in 
labor: 'We have products; we no longer have works. '" Ernst Robert Curtins, 
Balzac (Bonn, 1923), p. 260; citation from Beatrix <Balzac edition in La Collec- 
tion Michel-Levy (Paris, 1891-1899)> , p. 3. [dl2a,5] 

"The organization of intelligence is Balzac's goal. In this he sometimes, like the 
Saint-Simonians, entertains notions of corporation such as marked the Middle 
Ages. At these times, he returns to the idea ... of an incorporation of intellectual 
labor into the modern system of credit. The idea of the state's remunerating intel- 
lectual production also surfaces here and there." Ernst Rohert Curtius, Balzac 
(Bonn, 1923), p. 256. [dl2a,6] 

"Intelligential workers" — a coinage of Balzac's. See E. R. Curtius, Balzac (Bonn, 
1923), p. 263. [dl2a,7] 

<J.-A. > Chaptal, De I'Industrie francaise, vol. 2 (Paris, 1819), p. 198, estimates 
that the number of books published annually is 3,090. [dl2a,8] 

From the highly unfavorable "M. de Balzac," by Chaudes-Aigues: "Dungeons, 
brothels, and prisons would he asylums of virtue . . . compared to the civilized 
cities of M. de Balzac. . . . The banker is a man who has enriched himself through 
embezzlement and usury; the politician . . . owes his stature ... to cumulative acts 
of treachery; the manufacturer is a prudent and skillful swindler; . . . the man of 



letters ... is always hawking his opinions and his conscience. . . . The world as 
painted by M. de Balzac is ... a cesspool." ,I<acques> Chaudes-Aigues, Les Ecri- 
vains modemes de la France (Paris, 1841), p. 227. [dl3,l] 



"Nowadays, so many attested and authenticated facts have emerged from the 
occult sciences that the time will come when these sciences will be taught at univer- 
sities just as chemistry and astronomy are. Just now, when so many professorial 
chairs are being set up in Paris — chairs in Slavonic, in Manchurian studies, and in 
literatures so unprofessable as those of far northern lands; chairs which, instead 
of offering instruction, stand in need of it themselves . . . — is it not a matter of 
surprise that, under the name of anthropology, the teaching of occult philosophy, 
one of the glories of the old-time university, has not been restored? In this respect, 
Germany ... is a step ahead of France." Honore de Balzac, Le Cousin Pons, 1 " 1 in 
Oeuvres completes, vol. 18, La Comedie humaine: Scenes de la vie parisienne, 6 
(Paris, 1914), p. 131. □ Physiologies D [dl3,2] 

On Lamartine: "He is the most feminine of men in a century which has seen a great 
many such men, several of whom seem to announce themselves by the very article 
preceding their names: Lafayette, Lamennais, Lacordaire, Lamartine. . . . There 
are very good reasons for thinking that he had prepared for the red flag the same 
speech he delivered for the tricolor flag." AbelBonnard, Les Moderes, in the series 
entitled Le Drame du present, vol. 1 (Paris < 1936>), pp. 232-233. [dl3,3] 

"The novel ... is no longer only a way of telling a story but has become an 
investigation, a continual discovery. . . . Balzac stands at the limit of the literature 
of imagination and of the literature of exactitude. He has books in which the spirit 
of inquiry is rigorous, like Eugenie Grandet or Cesar Birotteau; others in which 
the unreal is blended with the real, like La Femme de trente cms; and still others, 
like Le Chef-d'oeuvre inconnu, composed of elements drawn from a variety of jeux 
d'esprit." Pierre Hamp, "La Litterature, image de la societe," Encyclopedie 
franqaise, vol. 16, Arts et litteratures dans la societe content poraine, 1, p. 64. 

[dl3,4] 

"By 1862, the year in which Victor Hugo publishes Les Miserables, the number of 
illiterates has considerably diminished in France. ... In proportion as an edu- 
cated populace begins to patronize hookshops, authors begin choosing their he- 
roes from the crowd, and the one in whom this phenomenon of socialization can 
best be studied is Hugo himself, the first great poet who gave to his literary works 
commonplace titles: Les Miserables, Les Travailleurs de la mer." Pierre Hamp, 
"La Litterature, image de la societe," Encyclopedie franqaise, vol. 16, Arts et 
litteratures dans la societe content por aine , 1, p. 64). [dl3a,l] 

These remarks on Scott might be applied to Victor Hugo: "He regarded rhetoric, 
the art of the orator, as the immediate weapon of the oppressed. . . . And it is odd 
to reflect that he was, as an author, giving free speech to fictitious rebels while he 



S was, as a stupid politician, denying it to real ones." G. K. Chesterton, Dickens, 
trans. Laurent and Martin-Dupont (Paris, 1 927) , p. 175. 18 [dl3a,2] 

monument of what happens when a great literary genius has a literary taste akin 
2 to that of the community. For this kinship was deep and spiritual. Dickens was 
S3 not like our ordinary demagogues and journalists. Dickens did not write what 
a the people wanted. Dickens wanted what the people wanted. . . . He died in 
^ 1870; and the whole nation mourned him as no public man has ever been 

ig mourned; for prime ministers and princes were private persons compared with 
Dickens. He had been a great popular king, like a king of some more primal age 
whom his people could come and see, giving judgment under an oak tree." G. K. 
Chesterton, Dickens, trans. Laurent and Martin-Dupont (Paris, 1927), pp. 72, 
168. 1!l [dl3a,3] 



he Nain jaune is founded by Aurelien Scholl; La Vie Parisienne, by Marcelin, a 
friend of Worth's. L 'Evenement founded in 1865 by Villemessant, with the partici- 
pation of Rochef ort, Zola, and others in the opposition. [dl3a,4] 



"Mires and the Pereire brothers, following the example of the Rothschilds, would 
from time to time cause an unexpected shower, not of gold hut of securities, to 
descend on well-known poets, journalists, and playwrights, without involving any 
direct ohligation in return." S. Kracauer, Jacques Offenbach unddas Paris seiner 
Zeit (Amsterdam, 1937), p. 252. 21 ' [dl4,l] 



"A single one of the new sciences — that of analogy — ought to yield authors a profi t 
of five million to six million francs for a sixteen-page installment." Charles 
Fourier, he Nouveau Monde inclustriel et societaire (Paris, 1829), p. 35. [dl4,2] 



Numher of Paris newspaper subscribers: in 1824, ca. 47,000; in 1836, ca. 70,000; 
in 1846, ca. 200,000. (Details for 1824: 15,000f or the government papers Journal 
de Paris, Etoile, Gazette, Moniteur, Drapeau blanc, Pilote; 32,000 for the opposi- 
tion papers Journal cles debuts, Constitutionnel, Quoticlienne, Courrier de Paris, 
Journal.du Commerce, Aristarque.) [dl4,3] 

With the increase in public advertising, newspapers turned against the annonces 
de guise es <advertisements in disguise>, which no doubt had brought in more for 
journalists than for the administration. [dl4,4] 



Around he Globe gathered, as editors, the most important of the later Orleanists; 
this editorial staff included Cousin, Villemain, Guizot. In 1829, Blanqui entered 
the office as stenographer, particularly as parliamentary stenographer. [dl4,5] 



The journalistic strain in the novels of Dumas: the first chapter of Les Molncans de 
Pans already provides information about what impost must be paid, in the event 



one is arrested, for the privilege of an individual cell; where the Paris executioner 
lives; and what the best-known apache pubs of Paris are. [dl4,6] 



A young man from St. Petersburg called Les Mysteres de Paris "the foremost hook 
after the Bihle." J. Eckardt, Die baltischen Provinzen Russlands (Leipzig, 1869), 
p. 406. [dl4,7] 

Valery, in his introduction to Les Fleurs du mal (Paris, 1928), p . xv, on Hugo: "For 
more than sixty years, this extraordinary man was at his desk every day from five 
o'clock in the morning until noon! He unremittingly called up new combinations of 
language, willed them, waited for them, and had the satisfaction of hearing them 
respond to his call. He wrote one or two hundred thousand lines of poetry and 
acquired, hy that uninterrupted exercise, a curious manner of thinking which 
superficial critics have judged as best they could." 21 [dl4,8] 

For nearly all the Romantics, the archetype of the hero is the bohemian; for 
Hugo, it is the beggar. In this regard, one should not lose sight of the fact that 
Hugo as writer made a fortune. [dl4a,l] 

Hugo in Post-scriptum de ma vie: L'Esprit; Tas de pierre, p. 1 (cited in Maria 
Ley-Deutsch, he Gueux chez Victor Hugo, series entitled Bibliotheque de la Fon- 
dation Victor Hugo, vol. 4 [Paris, 1936], p. 435): "Do you want a measure of the 
civilizing power of art . . . ? Look in the prisons for a man who knows of Mozart, 
Virgil, and Raphael, who can quote Horace from memory, who is moved by #r- 
phee and Der Freischiitz. . . . Look for such a man . . . , and you will not find 
him." [dl4a,2] 

Regis Messac speaks of an "epic period" which the feuilleton under Louis Philippe 
enjoys, hefore it hecomes a mass item in the Second Empire. The novels of Gabriel 
Ferry belong to the beginning of the latter era, as do those of Paul Feval. [dl4a,3] 

One can speak, in certain respects, of a contribution made by the physiologies to 
detective fiction. Only, it must be borne in mind that the combinative procedure 
of the detective stands opposed here to an empirical approach that is modeled on 
the methods of Vidocq, and that betrays its relation to the physiologies precisely 
through the Jackal in Les Mohicans de Paris (cited in Messac <Le "Detective Novel" 
et I'influence de la pense'e scientifique [Paris, 1929]>, p. 434), of whom it is said: 
"One look at the ripped-open shutter, at the broken pane, at the knife slash was 
enough: 'Oh ho!' he said, 'I recognize this! It is the modus operandi of one of 
them"' [dl4a,4] 

Veron pays 100,000 francs for he Juif errant before a line has been penned. 

[dl4a,5] 



"Every time a serial novel threatened to carry off the prize, Balzac redouhled his 
efforts with Vautrin. It was in 1837-1838 that Les Memoires du diable seemed to be 



dominating the serial format, and it was just at that point that the series entitled 
Splendeurs et miseres des courtisanes began. In 1842-1843, Les Mysteres de Paris 
appeared, and Balzac responded with A Combien V Amour revient aux vieillards. 
In 1844 Monte-Cristo, and in 1846 La Closerie des Genets; the latter year saw the 
publication of Balzac's Oil menent les mauvais chemins; the year after that, La 
Derniere incarnation de Vautrin. 22 If this dialogue . . . did not continue any fur- 
ther, it is because Balzac . . . died shortly afterward." Regis Messac, Le "Detective 
Novel" et Vinfluence de la pensee scientifique (Paris, 1929), pp. 403-4.04. 

[dl4a,6] 

Under the Second Republic, an amendment to the law of July 16-19, 1850, 
designed "to strike out against an industry that dishonors the press and that is 
detrimental to the business of the bookstores." So declaims de Riancey, the 
author of the amendment. The law imposes on each feuilleton a tax of one 
centime per copy. The provision was annulled by the new and more severe press 
laws of February 1852, through which the feuilleton gained in importance. 

[dl5,l] 

Nettement draws attention to the particular significance which the period for 
subscription renewal had for the newspapers. There was a tendency, at such 
times, to begin publishing a new novel in the feuilletons even before the old one 
had Snished its run. In tliis same period of development, the reaction of readers 
to the novels started to make itself felt more immediately. Publishers took note of 
this tendency and gauged their speculations beforehand according to the title of 
the new novel. [dl5,2] 

The novel published in installments can be seen as a precursor of the newspaper 
feuilleton. In 1836, a periodical of Karr's for the first time undertook to publish 
such installments — which later could be gathered under one cover — as a supple- 
ment for its readers. [dl5,3] 

Political attitude of Romanticism, according to Baudelaire's conception in "Petrus 
Borel": "If the Restoration had turned into a period of glory, Romanticism would 
not have parted company with royalty." "Later on, ... a misanthropic republi- 
canism joined the new school, and Petrus Borel was the . . . most paradoxical 
expression of the spirit of the Bousingots. . . . This spirit, . . . contrary to the 
democratic and bourgeois passion which later so cruelly oppressed us, was excited 
both by an aristocratic hatred . . . for kings and the bourgeoisie, and by a general 
sympathy . . . for all that . . . was . . . pessimistic and Byronic." Charles Baude- 
laire, L'Art romantique, ed. Hachette, vol. 3 (Paris), pp. 354, 353-354. 23 [dl5,4] 

"We in Paris have . . . seen the evolution of Romanticism favored by the monar- 
chy, while liberals and republicans alike remained obstinately wedded to the rou- 
tines of that literature called classical." Baudelaire, L'Art romantique (Paris), 
p. 220 ("Richard Wagner et Tannhduser").™ [dl55] 



Three forms of bohemianism: "That of Theophile Gautier, Arsene Houssaye, 
Gerard de Nerval, Nestor Koqueplan, Camille Rogier, Lassailly, Edouard Our- 
liac — a voluntary boheme . . . where one played at poverty . . . , a bastard scion of 
the old Romanticism . . . ; that of 1848, of Murger, Champlleury, Barbara, Nadar, 
Jean Wallon, Schanne — truly needy, this boheme, hut as quickly relieved, thanks 
to an intellectual camaraderie . . . ; and that finally of 1852, our boheme, not 
voluntary at all . . . hut cruelly grounded in privation." Jules Levallois, Milieu de 
siecle: Memoires d'un critique (Paris <1895>),pp. 90-91. [dl5a,lj 

Balzac sees human beings magnified through the mists of the future behind 
which they move. On the other hand, the Paris he describes is that of bis own 
time; measured against the stature of its inhabitants, it is a provincial Paris. 

[dl5a,2] 

'What I have in mind here will become sufficiently clear if I say that I fi nd in 
Balzac no interior life of any kind, but rather a devouring and wholly external 
curiosity, which takes the form of movement without passing through thought." 
Alain, Avec Balzac (Paris <1937>), p. 120. [dl5a,3] 

Laf orgue on La Fin de Satan: "I remember a phrase hy M. Mallarine: Each morn- 
ing, on rising from his bed, Hugo would go to the organ — like the great Bach, who 
piled up score upon score without concern for other consequences." Earlier, on 
the same page: "The organ continues as long as the score of the visible world lies 
open before his eager eyes, and as long as there is wind for the pipes." Jules 
Laforgue, Melanges posthumes (Paris, 1903), pp. 130-131. [dl5a,4] 

"It has often heen asked whether Victor Hugo had an easy time composing. It is 
clear that he was not endowed, or afflicted, with that strange facility in improvisa- 
tion thanks to which Lamartine never crossed out a word. The iron pen of the 
latter sped rapidly along, barely touching the satiny paper it covered with light 
marks. . . . Victor Hugo makes the paper cry out under his pen, which itself cries 
out. He reflects on each word; he weighs every expression; he comes to rest on 
periods, as one might sit upon a milestone — to contemplate the linished sentence, 
along with the open space in which the next sentence will begin." Louis Ulbach, Les 
Contemporains (Paris, 1883); cited in Raymond Escholier, Victor Hugo raconte 
par ceux qui Vontvu (Paris, 1931), p. 353. [dl5a.5] 

"Some of the letters which reached him were addressed simply: Victor Hugo, 
Ocean." Raymond Escholier, Victor Hugo raconte par ceux qui I'ont vn (Paris, 
1931), p. 273 ("Automne"). [dl5a,6] 

An early, highly characteristic specimen of the feuilleton style in the lettre 
parisienne of January 12, 1839, from the pen of the vicomte de Launais (Madame 
de Girardin): "There is a great deal of excitement over M. Daguerre's invention, 
and nothing is more amusing than the explanations of this marvel that are offered 



in all seriousness by our salon savants. M. Daguerre can rest easy, however, for 
no one is going to steal his secret. . . . Truly, it is an admirable discovery, but we 
understand nothing at all about it: there has been too much explanation." Mme. 
de Girardin, Oeuvres completes, vol. 4, pp. 289-290; cited in Gisele Freund, La 
Photographie en France au XIX siecle (Paris, 1936), p. 36. [dl 6,1] 

Baudelaire mentions "an immortal feuilleton" by Nestor Roqueplan, "Ou vont les 
chiens?" < Where Do Dogs Go?>, in Le Spleen de Paris, ed. R. Simon (Paris), p. 83 
("Les Bons Chiens"). 25 [dl 6,2] 

On Lamartine, Hugo, Michelet: "There is lacking to these men so rich in talent — 
as to their predecessors in the eighteenth century — that secret part of study 
whereby one forgets one's contemporaries in the search for truths, for that which 
afterward one can lay before them." Aiel Bonnard, Les Moderes, in the series 
entitled Le Drame du present, vol. 1 (Paris <1936>), p. 235. [dl6,3] 

Dickens: "There was a great deal of the actual and unbroken tradition of the 
Revolution itself in his early radical indictments; in his denunciations of the Fleet 
Prison there was a great deal of the capture of the Bastille. There was, above all, a 
certain reasonable impatience which was the essence of the old Republican, and 
which is quite unknown to the Revolutionist in modern Europe. The old Radical 
did not feel exactly that he was 'in revolt'; he felt if anything that a number of 
idiotic institutions had revolted against reason and against him." G. K. Chester- 
ton, Dickens, trans. Laurent and Martin-Dupont (Paris, 1927), pp. 164—165. 26 

[dl6,4] 

Gustave Geffroy (UEnferme <Paris, 1926>, vol. 1, pp. 155-156) points out that 
Balzac never described the unrest of the Parisian population in his days, the club 
life, the streetcorner prophets, and so on — with the possible exception of Z. Mar- 
cas, that slave of Louis Philippe's regime. [dl6,5] 

During the July Revolution, Charles X had handwritten appeals distributed 
among the insurgents by his troops. See Gustave Geffroy, L'Enferme, vol. 1, p. 50. 

[dl6,6] 

"It is . . . important to conceive of the possibility of reorienting aesthetics . . . 
toward influences operating on man thanks to representations engendered by the 
morphology of society itself. ... It is still more important to demonstrate that 
phenomena of this kind occur with the advent of universal literacy [that is to say, 
with the institution of compulsory primary school education, which was estab- 
lished at precisely the same time that the myth of Paris was formed ( — /Vote)]." 
Roger Caillois, "Paris, mythe moderne," ISouveUe Revue franquise, 25, no. 284 
(May 1, 1937), p. 699. [dl6a,l] 



Gautier, in his "Victor Hugo," on the red waistcoats at the premiere of Hernani: 
"To avoid the infamous red of '93, we had added a slight amount of purple to our 



tint. We did not wish to have any political motive attributed to us." Cited in 
Raymond Escholier, Victor Hugo raconte par ceux qui I'ont vu (Paris, 1931), 
p. 162. [dl6a,2] 



1852: "The reputation of the author of Hernani had passed, by the peculiar con- 
duits of bohemerie and utopianism, from the Latin Quarter to the faubourgs of 
Paris. Then, suddenly, the great metaphorist had had the revelation of the dogma 
of the sovereign people. . . . This revelation encompassed, at the same time, the 
projects of Michelet and Quinet and many another writer of lesser ability, such as 
Considerant." Leon Daudet, ha Tragique Existence de Victor Hugo (Paris 
<1937>), p. 98. — Around this time, Hugo made a speech to the troops. [dl6a,3] 

Hugo: "It was during one of those desolate excursions that the sight of a ship run 
aground on a nameless rock, its keel in the air, gave Hugo the idea for a new 
Robinson Crusoe, which he would call Les Travailleurs de la mer <The Toilers of 
the Sea> , lahor and the sea comprising the two poles of his exile. . . . Whereas in 
. . . Les Contemplations he had lulled his agonizing regret for the loss of his eldest 
daughter to the sea, he went on, in the prose of Les Travailleurs, to soothe the 
sadness he felt for the daughter who had sailed away. This marine element, then, 
was decidedly linked, by chains of black, to his destiny." Leon Daudet, La 
Tragique Existence de Victor Hugo (Paris), pp. 202-203. [dl6a,4] 

Juliette Drouet: "It is likely . . . that, beyond the question of former lovers and of 
debts, this propensity for ancillary amours, which attended the poet . . . from his 
thirtieth year until the end of his life, made him want to reduce his pretty actress 
to a subordinate position, to the position of beggar woman, . . . and the famous 
expiation might well have been only a metamorphosis of desire." Leon Daudet, La 
Tragique Existence de Victor Hugo (Paris), pp. 61-62. [dl7,l] 

Leon Daudet maintains that the failure of Le Roi s 'amuse in 1832 turned Hugo 
against the monarchy. [dl7,2] 

Hugo's panegyrics to Louis Napoleon were puhlished in L'Evenement. [dl7,3] 

From the record of the spiritualist sessions on Jersey (cited in Albert Beguin, 
L'Ame romantique et le reve [Marseilles, 1937], vol. 2), to which Beguin appends the 
just remark (p. 397): "Hugo transports all that he takes up — and which could 
appear pure foolishness were reason alone to judge — into his mythology, a little 
like the primitive savage initiated into the beauties of free and compulsory public 
education. But his vengeance (and his destiny as well) will be to become, himself, 
the myth of an age devoid of all mythic meaning." Hence, Hugo transported 
spiritualism into his world. "Evety great spirit carries on in his lif e two works : the 
work of the living person and the work of the phantom. . . . Whereas the living 
man performs the first work, the pensive phantom — at night, amid the universal 
silence — awakes widiin the man. O terror! 'What,' says the human being, 'that is 
not all?' — 'No,' replies the specter. 'Get up! Up! There is a great wind abroad, the 



hounds and the foxes are yelping, darkness is everywhere, and nature shudders 
and trembles under the whipcord of God.' . . . The writer-specter sees the phan- 
tom ideas. Words take fright, sentences shiver, . . . the windowpane grows dim, 
the lamp is afraid. . . . Take care, living man, O man of a century, O proscript of 
a terrestrial idea! For this is madness, this is the tomb, this is the infinite — this is a 
phantom idea" (p. 390). The "great spirit," in the same context: "He encounters 
certitude sometimes as an obstacle on his path, and clarity sometimes as a fear" 
(p. 391). — From Post-Scriptum de ma vie: "There exists a hilarity of shadows. 
Nocturnal laughter floats in the air. There are merry specters" (p. 396). [dl7,4] 

Hugo famously intoxicates himself — and not only in William Shakespeare — with 
long lists of the names of great geniuses. In this regard, one should recall the 
poet's passion for imagining his own name writ large; we know he read an H in 
the towers of Notre Dame. Another aspect of the matter is disclosed by his 
spiritualistic experiences. The great geniuses whose names he tirelessly rehearses, 
always in a different order, are his "avatars," incarnations of his own ego, and the 
more present for being ranged so before it. [dl7a,l] 

Just as, during the writing of Notre-Dame de Paris, Hugo every evening would 
visit one of the towers of the cathedral, so on Guernsey (Jersey?) he sought out 
the roc her des proscrits <exiles' rock>, from which every afternoon he would con- 
template the ocean. [dl7a,2] 

This decisive passage, which explodes the status of consciousness within the 
century, from "Ce que dit la Bouche d'ombre" : 

Weep for the unclean spider, for the worm, 

For the slug whose back is wet as winter, 

For the vile louse that hangs upon the leaf, 

For the liideous crab, and die appalling centipede, 

For the dreadful toad, poor monster with gentle eyes, 

Who is always gazing at the mysterious sky. 

The last line should be compared with that of Baudelaire's "Les Aveugles." 27 

[dl7a,3] 

Sainte-Beuve on Lamartine's role in 1848: "What he did not foresee is that he 
would he the Orpheus who later, for a time, would direct and govern, with his 
golden lyre, this invasion of barbarians." C. A. Sainte-Beuve, Les Consolations: 
Pensees d'aout, poems, part 2 (Paris, 1863), p. 1 18. [dl7a,4] 

"One remembers that the china and the tallies began to dance, while the rest of the 
world seemed to lie standing still — in order to encourage the others." Karl Marx, 
Das Kapital <vol. 1 > , eel. Korsch (Berlin < 1932>) <p. 83 > . 2!1 [dl7a,5] 



In a note in Das Kapital (ed. Korsch, p. 541), Marx speaks of "Balzac, who so 
thoroughly studied every shade of avarice." 2 " [dl7a,6] 



he Bo heme — was, at first, the organ of the proletarianized intellectuals of Del- 
vau's generation. [d!8,l] 



Bourget on Balzac: "Certain of his characters were more true-to-life in 1860 than 
in 1835." A. Cerfherr and J. Christophe, Repertoire de la Comedie humaine 
(Paris, 1887), p. v (introduction hy PaulBourget). <See d8,l.> [dl8,2] 

Taking a cue from Hofmannsthal (Versach iiber Victor Hugo <Munich, 1925>, 
pp. 23-25), one could provide an account of the birth of the newspaper from the 
spirit of rhetoric, 30 and emphasize how the spirit of representative political dis- 
course has conformed to that of empty chatter and civic gossip. [dl8,3] 

On the feuilleton: "Avid for gain, the editors of the hig newspapers have not 
wanted to demand that their feuilletonists write criticism founded on conviction 
and on truth. Their convictions have too often changed." This the judgment of the 
Fourierist press. H. J. Hunt, he Socialisme et fe romantisme en France: Etude de 
la presse socialiste de 1830 a 184S (Oxford, 1935) <p. 142 >. [dl8,4] 

Lamartine's politico-poetic program, model for fascist programs of today: "The 
ignorance and timidity of governments . . . has the effect, within all the parties, of 
disgusting one hy one those men endowed with breadth of vision and generosity of 
heart. Each, in his turn, disenchanted with the mendacious symbols that no longer 
represent them, these men are going to congregate around ideas alone. ... It is to 
help hring forth conviction, to add one voice more to this political gronp, that I 
temporarily renounce my solitude." Lamartine, "Des Destinees de la poesie" [sec- 
ond preface to Les Meditations], in Les Grand Ecrivains de la France: La- 
martine, vol. 2 (Paris, 1915), pp. 422-423. [dl8,5] 

On the serial novel in Sue's day: "The need to which these fantasies respond is that 
of discovering some relation among events that appear to he utterly random. Oh- 
scurely, the imagination persuades itself that all these inequalities of social exist- 
ence, these downfalls and ascents, constitute one and the same great action — in 
other words, that they proceed from a single cause and are connected one to 
another. The development of the serial novel parallels the creation of the social 
sciences." Cassou, Quarante-huit (Paris <1939>), p. 15. [dl8,6] 

Casson on the "democratic lyricism of Lamartine": "We discover in this a secret 
thought: our possessions, along with all their train of spiritual delights, accom- 
pany us to the very threshold of immortality. Hardly broached in Milly, •« Im terre 
natale, this theme hursts forth in La Vigne et la maison, expressing Lamartine's 
supreme desire — that of living on in a realm of physical immortality where every 
object preserves its perfect and savory reality. This eschatology, no doubt, differs 
a little from the pure spiritualism of La Mort de Socrate, with its Platonic inspira- 
tion. . . . But it reveals the profound nature of this aristocratic landowner." Jean 
Cassou, Quarante-huit (Paris), p. 173. [dl8a,l] 



The gargoyles of Notre Dame must be just about contemporary with Victor 
Hugo's novel. "Here Viollet-le-Duc, . . . whose work was so sharply criticized, 
has accomplished something remarkable. These devils and monsters are actually 
descendants of the grotesques created in the Middle Ages by the possessed imagi- 
nation, everywhere seeing demons, really seeing them." Fritz Stahl, Paris (Berlin 
<1929>), p. 72. We meet with the analogous phenomenon, it seems, in Hugo. At 
stake here, perhaps, is a question, one that coincides with the question: Why is 
the nineteenth century the century of spiritualism? [dl8a,2] 

An important relation between information and feuilleton is indicated by Laver- 
dant (this, at any rate, is how the signet "Lm" is read by Hunt, Le Socialume et le 
romantisme en France [Oxford, 1935]): "The distressing disputes . . . between Ger- 
many and France, the war in Africa — do not such facts deserve as much attention 
as skillfully told stories of former times or of individual misfortunes? This being 
the case, if the public . . . reads these great national novels chapter by chapter, 
why do you wish to impose on it, all at one time, your tale or your doctrine? . . . 
Division of labor and short sittings: such are the requirements of the reader." Lm, 
"Revue critique du feuilleton," La Phalange ,]\Ay 18, 1841; in La Phalange, 3rd 
series, vol. 3 (Paris, 1841), p. 540. [dl8a,3] 

"Victor Hugo, . . . according to a description hy Theophilc Gautier, would mix 
together on the same plate a cutlet, beans in oil, a ham omelette, and Brie cheese, 
and would drink cafe au lait seasoned with a dash of vinegar and a spot of mus- 
tard." R. B[runet], "La Cuisine regionale," Le Temps, April 4, 1940. [dl9] 