[The Stock Exchange, Economic History] 



"Napoleon represented the last onslaught of revolutionary terror against the 
bourgeois society which had been proclaimed by this same Revolution, and against 
its policy. Napoleon, of course, already discerned the essence of the modern state; 
he understood that it is based on the unhampered development of bourgeois soci- 
ety, on the free movement of private interest, and so forth. . . . Yet, at the same 
time, he still regarded the state as an end in itself and civil life only as a purse- 
bearer. . . . He perfected the Terror by substituting permanent war for permanent 
revolution. . . . If he despotically suppressed the liberalism of bourgeois society — 
the political idealism of its daily practice — he showed no more consideration for its 
essential material interests, trade and industry, whenever they conflicted with his 
political interests. His scorn for industrial homines d'affaires was the complement 
to his scorn for ideologues. . . . Just as the liberal bourgeoisie was opposed once 
more by revolutionary terror in the person of Napoleon, so it was opposed once 
more by counterrevolution during the Restoration, in the person of the Bourhons. 
Finally, in 1830, the bourgeoisie put into effect its wishes of the year 1789, the only 
difference being that its political enlightenment was now complete, that it no 
longer considered the constitutional representative state as a means for achieving 
the ideal of the state, the welfare of the world, and universal human aims hut, on 
the contrary, had acknowledged it as the official expression of its own exclusive 
power and the political recognition of its own special interests." Karl Marx and 
Friedrich Engels, Die heilige Familie; cited in Die neue Zeit, 3 (Stuttgart, 1885), 
pp. 388-389. 1 [gl,l] 

A schema from Edgar Quinet's De la Revolution et clela philosophie: "The devel- 
opment of German philosophy ... a sort of theory of the French political revolu- 
tion. Kant is the Constituent Assembly, Fichte the Convention, Schelling the 
Empire (in light of his veneration of physical force), and Hegel appears as the 
Restoration and the Holy Alliance." <Eduard> Schmidt-Weissenfels, Portraits 
aits Frankreich (Berlin, 1881), p. 120 ("Edgar Quinet und dei- franzbsische Na- 
tionalhaJJ" < Edgar Quinet and French National Hatred)). [gl^] 

Guizot ministry. "Corrupting the electoral colleges was a simple matter. These 
colleges generally comprised few electors; many contained less than 200, among 



which were government bureaucrats. The latter obeyed the orders they were 
given; as to ordinary electors, one could buy them by giving their dependents and 
favorites things like tobacco shops or scholarships, or by giving the elector himself 
some important administrative post. In the Chamber, as in the electoral colleges, 
government bureaucrats were quite numerous: more than a third of the deputies 
(184 out of 459, in 1846) were prefects, magistrates, officials. The minister con- 
trolled them by fueling their hopes for advancement. . . . To reach a majority, 
thirty or forty deputies were needed. Guizot won them with concessions for large 
state projects (this was in the early days of railroad construction) or hy giving 
them a share of the contract for supplies to the state. Corruption was thus built up 
into a system of government, and the numerous scandals at the end of the reign 
make glaringly clear that the underlings worked the system just as well as the 
prime minister." A. Malet and P. Grillet, XIX" Siecle (Paris, 1919), pp. 95, 97. 
Lamartine spoke, at this time, of the danger of an "electoral aristocracy" (1847). 

[gla,l] 

"On July 28, 1831, a Parisian man displays his portrait together with that of Louis 
Philippe, providing them with the following caption: 'There is no distance separat- 
ing Philippe from me. He is the citizen-king; I am the king-citizen."' Gisela 
Freund, "La Photographie au point de vue sociologique" (manuscript, p. 31), 
citing Jean Jaures, Histoire socialiste: he Regne de Louis-Philippe, p. 49. [gla,2] 

"'Paris is as sad as possible,' wrote the author of Colombo, at the height of the 
exhibition. 'Everyone is afraid without knowing why. It is a sensation akin to that 
produced by the music of Mozart when the Commendatore is about to enter. 2 . . . 
The least little incident is awaited like a catastrophe."' Adolphe Demy, Essai 
historique sur les expositions universelles de Paris (Paris, 1907), pp. 173-174. 

[gla,3] 

Some light on Napoleon's relation to the hourgeoisie around 1814. "The emperor 
had evinced the greatest reluctance at the prospect of arming the Paris population. 
Fearing the revolutionary spirit, he had refused the services of 50,000 workers, 
most of them former soldiers; he had wanted to organize companies . . . made up 
solely of citizens of the haute hourgeoisie — that is to say, those who were inclined 
to regard the allies as liberators. . . . People cursed Napoleon's name. Witness a 
letter to Colonel Greiner, second in command at the Ecole . . . : 'April 11, 1814. 3 
Cowardly slave of an equally cowardly master! Give me hack my son! Bloodthirst- 
ier even than the tyrant, you have outdone him in cruelty by delivering up to 
enemy fire the children we entrusted to your care — we who helieve in the law that 
guaranteed their education. Where are they? You will answer for this with your 
head! All the mothers are marching against you, and I myself, I promise you, will 
wring your neck with my own two hands if my son does not reappear soon.'" 
G. Pinet, Histoire de VEcole polytechnique (Paris, 1887), pp. 73-74, 80-81. The 
letter is from the father of Enfantin. [g2,l] 



"Protestantism . . . did away with the saints in heaven so as to be able to abolish 
their feast days on earth. The Revolution of 1789 understood still better what it 
was about. The reformed religion had held on to Sunday; but for the revolution- 
ary bourgeois, that one day of rest coming every seven days was too much, and 
they therefore substituted for the seven-day week the ten-day week <la decade >, 
so that the day of rest recurred but every ten days. And in order to bury all 
memory of the ecclesiastical holy days . . . , they replaced the names of saints, in 
the republican calendar, with the names of metals, plants, and animals." Paul 
Lafargue, "Die christliche Liebestatigkeit" [Die neue Zeit, 23, no. 1 (Stuttgart), 
pp. 145-146]. [g2,2] 

"In the first days of the Revolution, the question of the poor assumed ... a very 
distinct and urgent character. Bailly, who initially had been elected mayor of Paris 
for the express purpose of alleviating the misery of the . . . workers, packed them 
into masses and cooped them up — some 18,000 people — like wild animals, on the 
hill of Montmartre. Those who stormed the Bastille had workers with cannons 
emplaced there, lighted match in hand. . . . Had the war not drawn the unem- 
ployed and destitute laborers from town and countryside . . . into the army, and 
shuttled them off to the borders, ... a popular uprising would have spread across 
the whole of France." Paul Lafargue, "Die christliche Liebestatigkeit" [Die neue 
Zeit, 23, no. 1 (Stuttgart), p. 147]. [g2,3] 

"Our century, in which the sovereign is everywhere except on the throne." Balzac, 
Preface to Un Grand Homme de province a Paris; cited in Georges Batault, Le 
Pontife de la demagogie: Victor Hugo <Paris, 1934>, pp. 230-231. [g2a,l] 

On the writings of Napoleon III: "A set of commonplaces developed with sustained 
solemnity . . . , a perpetual clashing of antitheses, and then suddenly a striking 
formulation that captivates by its air of grandeur or seduces by its generosity . . . , 
along with ideas which are so confused that one can no longer distinguish them in 
the depths where they're apparently buried, but which, at the very moment one 
despairs of ever finding them, burst forth with the sound of trumpets." Pierre de 
la Gorce, Napoleon III et sa politique (Paris), pp. 4, 5; cited in Batault, Le Pontife 
de la demagogie, pp. 33-34. [g2a,2] 

Transition from the Napoleonic military regime to the peacetime regime of the 
Restoration. Engravings titled The Soldier-Laborer, The Soldier-Reapers, Gener- 
osity of a French Soldier, The Tomb of the Brave. Cabinet des Estampes. [g2a,3] 

"When, around 1829, M. de Saint-Cricq, director of Customs, announced the 
commercial shutdown, ... we were incredulous. It was so serious that it caused 
the July Revolution. On the eve of February 1848, during the harsh winter that 
preceded it, the shutdown returned, and with it unemployment. Twenty years 
later, in 1869, here it is again. No one has any desire for enterprise. The current 
government, with its Credit Mobilier and other companies, all so advantageous to 



the Stock Exchange, diverted for ten years the agricultural and industrial capital 
that earns comparatively little interest. Its free-trade treaty, opening France to 
English industry in 1860, . . . hrought litter ruin from the outset. Normandy says 
it cannot recover. Much less the ironworks of the North." J, Michelet, Nos jils 
(Paris, 1879), pp. 300-301. [g2a,4] 

A copper engraving of 1818: Xenomania Impugned, or It's No Disgrace To Be 
French. On the right, a column inscribed with the names of famous battles as well 
as famous works of art and literature. Under it, a young man with the honor roll of 
industry; his foot rests on a sheet hearing the inscription, "Products of Foreign 
Manufacture." Facing him, another Frenchman, who proudly points toward the 
column. In the hackground, an English civilian debates with a French soldier. All 
four persons provided with captions. Floating above in the sky and blowing into a 
trumpet, the figure — sharply reduced in scalt — of an angel. From his horn hangs 
a tablet with the words: "To Immortality." Cahinet des Estampes. [g2a,5] 

"If you pass in front of the Stock Exchange at noon, you will see a long line. . . . 
This line is composed of men from all walks of life — bourgeois, pensioners, shop- 
keepers, porters, errand boys, postmen, artists and actors — who come there to get 
a place in the first row, around the circular enclosure. . . . Positioned close to the 
floor, next to the puhlic crier, they purchase shares of stock which they sell off 
during the same session. That old white-haired fellow who offers a pinch of snuff 
to the guard passing by is the dean of these speculators .... From the general look 
of the trading on the floor and off, and from the faces of the stockbrokers, he is 
able to divine, with a marvelous instinct, the rise or the fall of stocks!." [Taxilc 
Delord,] Paris Boursier (Paris, 1854 ), pp. 44-46 ("Les Petits Paris"). [g3,l] 

On the Stock Exchange: "The Bourse dates only from the time of M. de ViUele. 
There was more initiative and more Saint-Simonianism in the mind of this minister 
from Toulouse than is generally helieved. . . . Under his administration, the posi- 
tion of stockbroker was sold for up to one million francs. The first words of 
speculation, though, were harely a lisp; the meager four billion in French deht, the 
several million in Spanish and . . . Neapolitan deht, were t he alphahet hy which it 
learned to read. . . . One put one's faith in the farm, in the house. ... Of a rich 
man it was said: he has land in the sun and a house in town! ... It was not until 
18:52, after the . . . sermons of Samt-Simonianism, . . . that the country found 
itself . . . suddenly ripe for its great financial destiny. In 1837, an irresistihle force 
could he observed attracting attention to the Bourse; the creation of the railroad 
added new momentum to this force. . . . The petite-coulisse in the colonnade <see 
Convolute O, note 9> does the husiness of the petty bourgeoisie; just heyond, the 
contre-pelite-coulisse handles the capital of the proletariat. The one operates for 
the porters, cooks, coachmen, grill-room proprietors, haberdashers, and waiters; 
the other descends a notch in the social hierarchy. One day we said t o ourselves: 
'The cobbler, the match seller, the hoiler cleaner, and the fried-potato vendor 
know how to put their capital to use; let's make the great market of the Bourse 




-'»<" ' is" t'l-ji,>m^ :l n't; a p,f J'&'pvtoi.* 

LEtrangomanie blamee, ou D 'Etre Francois il n'y a pas d 'affront 
(Xenomania Impugned, or It's No Disgrace to Be French). 
Courtesy of the Bibliotheque Nationale de France. See g2a,5. 



available to them. . . . Thus, we opened up the contre- petite-coulisse, trading be- 
yond the external market. We sold shares at a fixed rate of 3 francs, 50 centimes, 
and made a profit of one centime. Business was booming in this market when the 
debacle of last month occurred." 1 [Taxile Delord,] Paris-Boursier (Paris, 1854), 
pp. 6-8, 56-57 ("Les Petits Paris"). [g3,2] 

Commercial crisis of 1857 as cause of the Italian campaign. [g3,3] 

"Enf antin exhorts his political comrades ... to establish, in addition to the 'indus- 
trial credit' already in existence, an 'intellectual credit. , " This was in 1863! C. L. 
de Licfdc, he Saint-Simonisme dans la poesie francaise, 1825-1865 < Haarlem, 
1927 >, p. 113. [g3a,l] 



Balzac's portrait of the speculator Diard in Les Marana: "He demanded thus- 
and-such percent on the purchase of fifteen legislative votes, which passed, in the 
space of one night, from the benches of the Left to those of the Right. That sort of 
thing is no longer rohbery, or any sort of crime; it is simply carrying on the 
government, becoming a silent partner in the national industry." Cited in Ahbe 
Charles Calippe, Balzac: Ses idees sociales (Reims and Paris < 1906>), p. 100. 3 

[g3a,2] 

"It was in . . . 1838 that the government, in the person of M. Martin from Nord, 
had the good idea of bringing before the Chambers the project of a great network 
of national railways — a gigantic undertaking which the state alone would carry 
out. . . . Against this untoward governmental project he Journal des debats 
launched a devastating attack, from which the project did not recover. Two years 
later, the concession for the two principal lines of the West and the South was 
granted hy the state to two large companies. . . . Five years later, . . . Pere Enfan- 
tin was secretary of the administrative council of the Lyons railroad, . . . and the 
pact between Saint-Simon and Judea . . . was sealed forever. . . . All this was the 
work of the Father <see U14a,l>. . . . Too many Jewish names appear on the 
membership rolls of the Saint-Simonian church for us to be surprised at the fact 
that the system of financial feudalism was established by the disciples of Saint- 
Simon." A. Toussenel, Les Juifs, rois de I'epoque (Paris <1886>), ed. Gonet, 
pp. 130-133. [ g 3a,3] 

"It was not the French bourgeoisie as such that ruled under the bourgeois king, 
hut merely . . . the financial aristocracy. The entire industrial corps, on the other 
hand, was in the opposition." Eduard Fuchs, Die Karikatur der europiiischen 
Vblker (Munich <1921>), vol. 1, p. 365. [g3a,4] 

"Before 1830, large-scale agriculture held sway over public policy; after 1830, the 
manufacturers took its place, hut their reign had already developed under the 
regime which had been overthrown hy the barricades. . . . Whereas 15 factories 
had heen equipped with machines in 1814, there were 65 in 1820 and 625 in 1830." 
Paul Louis, Histoire de la classe ouvriere en France, de la Revolution a nos jours 
(Paris, 1927), pp. 48-49. [g3a,5] 

"The enslavement of governments is on the increase, and the influence of specula- 
tors has grown to such an extent that the gambling den of the Bourse has hecome 
the compass of puhlic opinion." Cited in F. Armand and R. Maublanc, Fourier 
(Paris, 1937), vol. 2 , p. 32. [g4 J] 

Fourier's Bourse: "There is much more animation and intrigue at the Stock Ex- 
change of a Phalanx than there is at the stock exchanges of London and Amster- 
dam. For every individual must go to the Exchange to arrange his work and 
pleasure sessions for the following days. . . . Assuming that 1,200 individuals are 
present, and that each one has twenty sessions to arrange, this means that, in the 



meeting as a whole, there are 24,000 transactions to be concluded. Each of these 
transactions can involve twenty, forty, or a hundred individuals, who must be 
consulted and intrigued with or against. . . . Negotiations are carried on quietly, 
by means of signals. Each negotiator holds up the escutcheons of the groups or 
phalanxes which he represents, and by certain prearranged signs he indicates the 
approximate number of members he has recruited." Publication des manuscrits 



The term Bourse de travail < Labor Exchange) was coined by Fourier, or a Fouri- 



In 1816 there were seven listings on the Stock Exchange; in 1847, more than two 



de Fourier (Paris, 1851-1858), 4 vols., Year 1851, pp. 191-192. 



[g4,2] 



erist. 



[g4,3] 



hundred. 



[g4,4] 



In 1825, according to Marx,' the first crisis of modern industry — that is, the lirst 
crisis of capitalism. [g4,5] 