[Reproduction Technology, Lithography] 



"The social philosophy of the art of lithography at its heginnings . . . After the 
image makers of the Napoleonic legend, after the literary artists of Romanticism, 
came the chroniclers of the daily life of the French. The first group unwittingly 
paved the way for political upheavals, the second hastened the evolution of litera- 
ture, and the third contributed to the profound demarcation between the aristoc- 
racy and the people." Henri Bonehot, La Lithographie (Paris <1895>), pp. 112, 
114. [il,l] 

Pigal portrays the people; Monnier, the petty bourgeoisie; Lami, the aristocracy. 

[il,2] 

The important contribution of amateurs can be observed in the early days of 
lithography, exactly as it can later in photography. [il,3] 

"The contest between lithography and stipple-engraving accelerates from day to 
day, hut, since the end of 1817, the victory has belonged to lithography, thanks to 
the existence of caricature." Henri Bonehot, La Lithographie (Paris <1895>), 
p. 50. [il,4] 

Bouchot looks on lithographs produced before 1817 as the incunabula of lithog- 
raphy. From 1818 to 1825, lithographic production in France steadily expands. 
Political circumstances made this upsurge much more visible there than in other 
countries. Its decline, too, is in part conditioned by politics: it coincides with the 
rise of Napoleon III. "Tire fact is . . . that, of the illustrious number present under 
the reign of Louis Philippe, there remained, in the early years of Napoleon III, 
barely four or five exhausted, disoriented survivors." Henri Bouchot, La Lit/wg- 
raphie (Paris), p. 182. [il,5] 

Lithography toward the end of the Second Empire: "So many things worked 
against it! The newly revived etching, the nascent heliographic processes, and to 
some extent the burin. Materially, it foundered under the difficulties associated 
with printing — the encumbrance of those very heavy stones, which the editors 
refused to warehouse as before." Henri Bonehot, La Lithographie (Paris), p. 193. 

[il,6] 



Raffet undertook lithographic reportage in the Crimea. [il,7] 

1835-1845: "It should . . . not be forgotten that the large-scale commercial opera- 
tion which, at that time, was underway in wood engraving very quickly . . . led to 
mass-production techniques. A woodcutter would make only the heads or figures 
in a work, while another less skilled, or an apprentice, would make the accesso- 
ries, the backgrounds, and so on. Out of such a division of labor nothing unified 
could . . . emerge." Eduard Fuchs, Honore Daumier: Holzschnitte, 1833-1870 
(Munich <1918>), p. 16. [il,8] 

The first attempt at introducing lithography into France, undertaken by Sene- 
felder's associate Andre d'Offenbach, was a complete failure. "He had . . . moved 
to France solely with the intention of selling musical scores printed by means of 
lithography. The patent had been taken out in his name in 1802, and he had 
opened a shop, . . . little suspecting . . . what was in store for the discovery. ... As 
a matter of fact, it was not an auspicious moment for the minor arts of transcrip- 
tion. The master David expressed only the haughtiest disdain for engraving; at 
most, he had a few kind words for the copper-plate technique. Andre's enterprise 
was very soon in jeopardy." Henri Bouchot, ha Lithographie (Paris <1895>), 
pp. 28-29. [ila,l] 

On Dore's contributions to he Journal illustre andLe Journal pour tous: "These 
publications that sold for two sous — he Journal pour tous, he Journal illustre, he 
Tour du monde — where Dore gave of himself with stupefying prodigality and 
verve, served him, above all, as a laboratory for his researches. Indeed, in the 
grandes editions sold in bookshops, produced at high cost (for those days) hy 
Hachette or Gamier, the imagination, the fantasy, the energy of Gustave Dore 
were . . . , to a certain extent, disciplined and contained hy the requirements of a 
deluxe edition." Roger Devigne, "Gustave Dore, illustrateur dc journaux a deux 
sous et reporter du crayon," Arts et Metiers graphiques, 50 (December 15, 1935), 
p. 35. [ila,2] 

"The Paris worker in revolt appears, in hooks and in illustrations, as a veteran of 
the street wars, a seasoned revolutionary, going about half naked with a cartridge 
helt and saber crisscrossed over his shirt, with a headdress like an African chief- 
tain — a gold-hraided kepi or a plumed hat — penniless, worn out, magnanimous, 
blackened with powder and sweating from the sun, ostentatiously calling for water 
when he is offered a glass of wine, installing Viimself comfortably on the uphol- 
stered throne in the manner of the sans culottes of '93, eyeing his companions at 
the exit to the royal apartments, shooting any thieves. Take a look at drawings by 
Charlet and by Raffet; read the accounts, in the form of glorifications that were 
sold, a few days after a hattle, for the benefit of widows, orphans, and the 
wounded." Gustave Geffroy, h'Enferme (Paris, 1926), vol. 1, p. 51. [ila,3] 



Certain pamphlets hy Marx were lithographed. (According to Casson, Quarante- 
huit <Paris, 1939 >, p. 148.) [i2]