[The Commune] 



"The history of the Paris Commune has hecome a touchstone of great importance 
for the question: How should the revolutionary working class organize its tactics 
and strategy in order to achieve ultimate victory? With the fall of the Commune, 
the last traditions of the old revolutionary legend have likewise fallen forever; no 
favorahle turn of circumstances, no heroic spirit, no martyrdom can take the 
place of the proletariat's clear insight into . . . the indispensable conditions of its 
emancipation. What holds for the revolutions that were carried out hy minorities, 
and in the interests of minorities, no longer holds for the proletarian revolu- 
tion. ... In the history of the Commune, the germs of this revolution were effec- 
tively stifled by the creeping plants that, growing out of the bourgeois revolution of 
the eighteenth century, overran the revolutionary workers' movement of the nine- 
teenth century. Missing in the Commune were the firm organization of the prole- 
tariat as a class and the fundamental clarity as to its world-historical mission; on 
these grounds alone it had to succumb." [F. Mehring,] "Zum Gedachtnis der Par- 
iser Kommune," Die neue Zeit, 14, no. 1 (Stuttgart, 1896), pp. 739-740. [kl,l] 

"We will say hut two words about the lecture-presentations that have multiplied in 
recent years. . . . M. Ballande, who first thought of devoting Sunday afternoons to 
the inexpensive performance of masterpieces or the exhibition of certain monu- 
ments of art, preceded hy a historical and literary explication of the work, had hit 
upon a happy and rewarding idea. . . . But success breeds imitation, and it is rare 
that the imitations do not bring out the trouhlesome aspects of the things they 
copy. This is indeed what happened. Daily presentations were organized at the 
Chatclet and the Ambigu. In these performances, questions of artistry were rele- 
gated to a position of secondary importance; politics predominated. Someone 
fetched up Agnes de Meranie; another exhumed Calas and Charles IX, ou L 'EcoJe 
des rois. [ . . . From here, things could only go downhill; the most benign of works, 
by a strange inflection of the political madness, provided material . . . for the most 
heterogeneous declamations on the affairs of the day. Moliere and Louis XIV 
would certainly have heen surprised, at times, by the attacks . . . for which they 



served as pretexts. This type of 'theatrical' presentation completely deliecl all 
control." — "When revolutions break out, one often hears admissions that can be 
highly instructive. Here is what was said in Le Mot d'ordre of May 17, 1871, on the 
subject of the citizenship cards: 2 'The overly assiduous reading of Le Chevalier de 
Maison-Rouge and other novels hy Alexandre Dumas certainly inspired the mem- 
bers of the Commune to come up with this decree. We regret having to inform them 
that history is not made hy reading novels.'" Victor Hallays-Dahot, La Censure 
drmmatique et le thei.tr e, 1850-1870 <Paris, 1871>, pp. 68-69, 55. [Le Mot 
d'ordre is presumably an organ of Rochefort. ] [kl ,2] 

The Commune felt itself to be, in all respects, the heir of 1793. [kl ,3] 

The passage in Hallays-Dabot, p. 55 <cited in kl,2>, is very important for the 
connection between colportage and revolution. [kl ,4] 

"At several intersections, our path opened out unexpectedly into vast arched 
domes. . . . Surely, each of these clandestine colosseums would provide a useful 
stronghold for the concentration of forces in certain eventualities, just as the 
infinity of subterranean networks, with its thousand galleries running under every 
corner of the capital, provides a ready-made sap from which to attack the city 
from helow. . . . The lightning bolt that annihilated the Empire did not leave it 
time to act on this conception. It is harder to figure out why the leaders of the 
Commune, ... so resolute in everything, did not make use of this formidable 
means of destruction when faced with the appearance of troops." Nadar, Quand 
j'etais photographe (Paris <1900>), p. 121 ("Paris souterrain") . Refers to the 
"Letter from N — (Paris) to Louis Blanc (Versailles), May 1871," which voices just 
such an expectation. [kla,l] 

"If Rimbaud is in fact admirable, it is not for having fallen silent but for having 
spoken. If he fell silent, it was douhtless for lack of a true audience. It was hecause 
the society in which he lived could not offer him this audience. One ought to keep 
in mind the very simple fact that Arthur Rimhaud came to Paris in 1871, quite 
naturally, to join the army of the Commune. ... In the barracks of the Chateau- 
d'Eau, the young Rimhaud did not yet question the utility of writing and singing 
about the hands of the Wench, of the Jeanne-Marie of the fauhourgs, who is not 
the plaster Marianne of the town halls: 

They are the hands not of a cousin 
But of working women witli large foreheads 
Burned, in woods stinking of a factory, 
By a sun drunk on tar. 

They have paled, marvelous, 
Under the great sun full of love, 
O n t li e hro nze of m ac lii lie gu ns , 
Throughout insurgent Paris!' 1 



Then, in the Assemblies of the Commune . . . , side by side with the workers of 
Paris . . . , with the warriors of socialism, one could see the poet of the Interna- 
tional, Potier ; the author of L 'Insurge, Jules Valles; the painter of L ' Enterrement 
a Ornans, Courbet; and the brilliant researcher into the physiology of the cerebel- 
lum, the great Flourens." <Louis> Aragon, "D'Alfred de Vigny a Avdeenko," 
Commune, 2 (April 20, 1935), pp. 810, 815. [kla,2] 

"The Commune, which accorded seats only to those elected from the workers' 
districts, was formed of a coalition of revolutionaries without a common program. 
Of the seventy-eight members, only a score were intent on projects of social re- 
form; the majority were Jacobin democrats in the tradition of 1793 (Delescluze)." 
A. Malet, P. Grillet, XIX" Siecle (Paris, 1919), pp. 481-482. [kla,3] 

Within the Commune emerged the project of a Monument to the Accursed, which 
was supposed to be raised in the corner of a public square whose center would be 
occupied by a war memorial. All the official personalities of the Second Empire 
(according to the draft of the project) were to be listed on it. Even Haussmann's 
name is there. In this way, an "infernal history" of the regime was to be launched, 
although the intention was to go back to Napoleon I, "the villain of Brumaire — the 
chief of this accursed race of crowned bohemians vomited forth to us by Corsica, 
this fatal line of bastards so degenerated they would be lost in their own native 
land." The project, in the form of a printed placard, is dated April 15, 1871. 
(Exhibition entitled "La Commune de Paris," Municipal Offices of Saint-Denis.) 

[k2,l] 

"There are your fruits, bloodthirsty Commune; / Yes, . . . you wanted to annihi- 
late Paris." The last line is the refrain of a poem, "Les Ruines de Paris," printed as 
a pamphlet (Exhibition by the Municipality of Saint-Denis). [k-2,2] 

A lithograph by Marcier, Le Depart de la Commune, published by Deforet et 
Cesar Editeurs, shows a woman (?) riding an animal that is half-nag and half- 
hyena, wrapped in a giant shroud, and brandishing the tattered, dirty red llag, 
while leaving behind her a murky alley filled with the smoke and llames of burning 
houses. (Exhibition, Municipality of Saint-Denis.) [k2,3] 

After the taking of Paris, L'lllustration published a drawing entitled Chasse a 
Vhomme dans les catacombes < Manhunt in the Catacombs). In fact, the cata- 
combs were searched one day for fugitives. Those found were shot. The troops 
entered at the Place Denfert-Rochereau, while the outlets of the catacombs toward 
the plain of Montsouris were guarded. (Exhibition.) [k2,4] 

A Communard pamphlet publishes a drawing captioned Les Cadavres decouverts 
dans les souterrains de VEglise Saint-Laurent <The Cadavers Discovered in the 
Vaults of the Church of Saint-Laurent). It was claimed that female corpses had 



been discovered at this underground site — bodies which could not have been there 
longer than a couple of years, and whose thighs were forced open and hands 
bound. (Exhibition.) [k.2,5] 



Leaflet; lithograph, She. The republic as a beautiful woman wrapped around by a 
snake, whose features are those of Thiers. The woman has a mirror high over her 
head. Beneath, a verse: "Many the ways you can take her — / She is for rent, but 
not for sale." [k2,6] 

The illusions that still underlay the Commune are given striking expression in 
Proudhon's formula, his appeal to the bourgeoisie: "Save the people and save 
yourselves — as your fathers did — by the Revolution." Max Raphael, Proudhon, 
Marx, Picasso (Paris <1933>), p. 1 18. [k2a,l] 

Remember the words of Chevalier: "Glory to us! We have entered into the 
treasury of kings, escorted by poverty and hunger; we have walked amid the 
purple, gold, and diamonds; when we came out, our companions were hunger 
and poverty." "Religion Saint-Simonienne: La Marseillaise" (Excerpt from L'Or- 
ganisateur of September 11, 1830) [author Michel Chevalier, according to the 
Catalogue de la Bibliotheque Nationale], p. 2. [k2a,2] 

One of the Commune's last centers of resistance: the Place de la Bastille. [k2a,3] 

Charles Louandre, Les Ide'es subversives de notre temps (Paris, 1872), is a charac- 
teristic example of the reactionary pamphlets that followed in the wake of the 
Commune. [k2a,4] 

A caricature of Courbet: the painter standing on a broken column. Beneath, the 
caption: "Actuality." Cabinet des Estampes, kc 164 a 1. 1 [k2a,5] 

"Louise Michel, recounting, in her memoirs, a conversation she had with Gustave 
Courbet, shows us the great Communard painter enraptured on the topic of the 
future, losing himself in visions which, though they are redolent of their own 
nineteenth century, are despite this — or perhaps because of it — marked by a won- 
drous and touching grandeur. 'Since everyone will be able to give himself over, 
unfettered, to his own special genins,' prophesied Courbet, 'Paris will double in 
importance. And Europe's international city will be able to offer to the arts, to 
industry, to commerce, to transactions of all kinds, and to visitors from all lands 
an imperishable order: the citizen-created order, which cannot be disrupted by 
the pretexts of monstrous pretenders. ' It is a dream ingenuous as the world exhibi- 
tions, but one which nonetheless implies profound realities — above all, the certi- 
tude that a unanimous order will be founded, 'the citizen-created order.'" Jean 
Cassou, "La Semaine sanglante," Vendredi, May 22, 1936. [k2a,6] 



ACTUAL1TE 




;:;>^::^: : ::L[',y.^; 



Adualite (Actuality), a caricature of the painter Gustave Courbet. 
Courtesy of the Bibliotheque Nationale de France. See k2a,5. 

In France's First Empire, and especially its Second, Engels sees states that could 
appear as a court of mediation hetween an equally strong bourgeoisie and prole- 
tariat. See G. Mayer, Friedrich Engels, vol. 2 (Berlin <1933>), p. 441. [k2a,7] 

The desperate struggle of the Commune: "Delescluze then issued his famous proc- 
lamation: 'Enough of this militarism! No more of these officers dripping gold hraid 
and emhroidery! Make way for the people, for hare-armed lighters! The hour of 
revolution has struck. . . . ' An impatient enthusiasm awakes in all hearts, and one 
will go off to get oneself killed, as the Polish strategists intend/' Each man will 
return to his neighborhood, his native turf, to the streetcorner where it is good to 
live and bravely die — the traditional barricade! This proclamation is the last cry 
of Blanquism, the supreme leap of the nineteenth century. One still wants to be- 
lieve. To believe in the mystery, the miracle, the f euilleton, the magic power of the 



epic. One has not yet understood that the other class has organized itself scien- 
tifically, has entrusted itself to implacable armies. Its leaders have long since ac- 
quired a clear vision of the situation. Not for nothing had Haussmann built broad, 
perfectly straight avenues to break up the swarming, tortuous neighborhoods, the 
breeding grounds for mystery and for the f euilleton, the secret gardens of popular 
conspiracy." Jean Cassou, "La Semaine sanglante," Venclrecli, May 22, 1936. 

[k3,l] 

Engels and the Commune: "As long as the central committee of the Garde Nation- 
ale was directing the military operations, he remained hopeful. 1 1 was doubtless he 
who gave the advice which Marx transmitted to Paris: 'to fortify the northern 
slopes of Montmartre, the Prussian side.' He feared that, otherwise, the uprising 
'would land in a mousetrap.' But the Commune failed to heed tliis warning and, as 
Engels regretfully confirmed, let the right moment for the offensive slip past. . . . 
Initially, Engels believed that the struggle would drag on. ... In the General 
Council, he emphasized . . . that the Parisian workers were better organized mili- 
tarily than in any earlier rebellion; that the street widening undertaken during the 
administration of Napoleon 01 would necessarily work to their advantage, should 
the assault on the city succeed; that for the first time, the harricades would be 
defended by cannons and regularly organized troops." Gustav Mayer, Friedrich 
Engels, vol. 2, Engels unci der Aufstieg cler Arbeiterbewegung in Euro pa (Berlin 
<1933>), p. 227." [k3,2] 

In 1884, Engels "admitted to Bernstein that Marx 'had upgraded the unconscious 
tendencies of the Commune into more or less conscious projects,' and he added 
that this improvement had been 'justified, even necessary, in the circumstances.' 
. . . The majority of the participants in the uprising had heen Blanquists — that is 
to say, nationalistic revolutionaries who placed their hopes on immediate political 
action and the authoritarian dictatorship of a few resolute individuals. Only a 
minority had belonged to the <First> International, which at that time was still 
dominated by the spirit of Proudhon, and they could therefore not he descrihcd as 
social revolutionaries, let alone Marxists. That did not prevent the governments 
and the bourgeoisie throughout Europe from regarding this insurrection ... as a 
conspiracy hatched by the General Council of the International." Gustav Mayer, 
Friedrich Engels, vol. 2, Engels und der Aufstieg der Arbeiterbewegung in 
Euro pa (Berlin), p . 228. 7 [k3a,l] 

The first communio: the city. "The German emperors — Frederick I and Frederick 
II, for instance — issued edicts against these communiones [communities], conspi- 
rations, . . . quite in the spirit of the German Federal Diet. ... It is quite amusing 
that the word communio was used as a term of ahuse, just as 'communism' is 
today. The parson Guibert of Nogent writes, for instance: 'Communio is a new and 
extremely had word.' There is frequently something rather dramatic about the 
way in which thephilistines of the twelfth century invite the peasants to flee to the 
cities, to the communio jurata < sworn communes)." Marx to Engels, July 27, 



A barricade of the Paris Commune, Rue Basfroi (ll e arrondissement), March 18, 1871. Photogra- 
pher unknown. See k.4,5. 



1854, from London [Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, Ausgewiihlte Briefe, ed. 
V. Adoratski (Moscow and Leningrad, 1934), pp. 60-61]." [k3a,2] 

Ibsen saw further than many of the leaders of the Commune in France. On 
December 20, 1870, he writes to Brandes: "Up till now, we have been living on 
nothing but crumbs from the revolutionary table of last century, and I think we 
have been chewing on that stuff long enough. . . . Liberty, equality, and fraternity 
are no longer what they were in the days of the late-lamented guillotine. This is 
what the politicians will not understand; and that is why I hate them." Henrik 
Ibsen, Samtliche Werke, vol. 10 <Berlin, 1905>, p. 156. 9 [k3a,3] 

It was the Proudhonist Beslay who, as delegate of the Commune, allowed himself 
to be persuaded on March 30, by de Ploeuc, deputy governor of the Banque de 
France, to leave untouched, in the interests of France, the two billion francs — 
"the true hostages." With the support of the Proudhonists on the council, his view 
prevailed. [k4,l] 

Blanqui, in La Patrie en danger, the newspaper he published during the siege :'" 
"It is Berlin that supposedly will be the holy city of the future, the radiance that 
enlightens the world. Paris is the usurping and corrupted Bahylon, the great pros- 
titute which God's emissary, the exterminating angel, with Bible in hand, will wipe 
from the face of the earth. You mean you don't know that the Lord has marked the 



German race with the seal of predestination? . . . Let us defend ourselves. It is the 
ferocity of Odin, magnified by the ferocity of Moloch, that advances against our 
cities; it is the barbarity of the Vandal and the barharity of the Semite." Cited in 
Gustave Geffroy, L 'Enferme (Paris, 1897), p. 304. [k4,2] 

Georges Laronze in his Histoire de la Commune de 1871 (Paris, 1928), p. 143, on 
the shooting of the hostages: "hy the time the hostages fell, the Commune had lost 
power. But it remained accountable." 11 [k4,3] 

The Parisian administration during the Commune: "It preserved intact the entire 
organism, animated, as it was, by a keen desire to set its slightest cogwheels rolling 
again and to augment further — in good hourgeois fashion — the number of middle- 
class functionaries." Georges Laronze, Histoire de la Commune de 1871 (Paris, 
1928), p. 450. [k4,4] 

Military formations in the Commune: "A company little inclined to go beyond the 
city's ramparts, preferring, to combat in open country, the hattle atmosphere of 
its own quartiei; the fever of public meetings, the clubs, the police operations, 
and, if necessary, death behind the heaped-up paving stones of a Paris street." 
Georges Laronze, Histoire de la Commune de 1871 (Paris, 1928), p. 532. [k4,5] 

Courbet took sides with several other Commnnards against Protot, to protect 
Thiers 's collections from destruction. 12 [k4,6] 

The members of the International got themselves elected, on the advice of Varlin, 
to the Central Committee of the Garde Nationale. [k4,7] 



"This orgy of power, wine, women, and blood known as the Commune." Charles 
Louandrc, Les Idees subversives de notre temps (Paris, 1872), p. 92. [k4,8] 