[The Seine, the Oldest Paris] 



Around 1830: "The quartier was full of those gardens which Hugo has described in 
<his poem of 1839> 'Ce qui se passait aux Feuillantines.' The Luxembourg, rather 
more grand than it is today, was bordered directly by houses; the proprietors each 
had a key to the garden and could walk up and down there all night long." Duhech 
and d'Espezel, Histoire de Paris (Paris, 1926), p. 367. [H>1] 

"Ramhuteau had two rows of trees planted" — on the Boulevards Saint-Denis and 
Bonne-Nouvelle — "to replace those old and beautiful trees which had gone into 
the barricades of 1830." Dubech and d'Espezel, Hist oire de Paris, p. 382. [11 ,2] 

"Housewives go to draw their water from the Seine; the more distant neighbor- 
hoods are supplied by water carriers." Duhech and d'Espezel, Histoire de Paris, 
pp. 388-389 (section on the July Monarchy). [11,3] 

Before Haussmann: "Prior to his day, the old aqueducts were capable of bringing 
water only as high as the second story." Duhech and d'Espezel, Histoire de Paris, 
p. 418. [11,4] 

"Anglomania . . . has had an influence on ideas since the Revolution, on fashions 
since Waterloo. Just as the Constituents copied England's political institutions, 
the architects copied the parks and squares of London." Duhech and d'Espezel, 
p. 404, [11,5] 

"The route of the Seine, as attested in Strabo, began to be used and appreciated. 
Lutetia became the center of an association of navigators or mariners, who, during 
the reign of Tiberius , raised to the emperor and to Jupiter the famous altar that 
was discovered under Notre Dame in 1711." Dubech and d'Espezel, p. 18. [11,6] 



"The winter here is not severe. You can see vineyards and even fig trees, since care 
is taken to cover them with straw." Julian in the Misopogon; cited in Duhech and 
d'Espezel, p. 25. [11,7] 



"The Seine seems to exhale the air of Paris all the way to its mouth." Friedrich 
Engels, "Von Paris nach Bern," Die neue Zeit, 17, no. 1 (Stuttgart, 1899), p. II. 

[11,8] 

"If reading in the public gardens is now permitted, smoking there is not — liberty 
(as people are beginning to say) not heing the same as license." Nadar, Quand 
j'etais photographe (Paris <1900>), p. 284 ("1830 et environs"). [11,9] 

"Not long ago we witnessed the erection of the obelisk brought hack from Luxor hy 
the prince de Joinville. 1 We were made a bit nervous by noises that must not have 
heen reassuring to the engineer Lebas, supervisor of the operation: the English, 
always so jealous, . . . were supposed to have paid a traitor to cut the insides of the 
cables. Oh, those English!" Nadar, Quand j'etais photographe (Paris), p. 291 
("1830 et environs"). [11,10] 

Liberty trees — poplars [peupliers] — were planted in Paris in 1848. Thiers: ''''Peo- 
ple, you will grow tall." They were cut down in 1850 by order of the prefect of 
police, Carlier. [U>11] 

After the July Revolution: "The endless number of felled trees on the road to 
Neuilly, on the Champs-Elysees, on the boulevards. Not a single tree has been left 
standing on the Boulevard des Italiens." Friedrich von Raumer, Briefe aus Paris 
wild Frankreich im Jahre 1830 (Leipzig, 1831), vol. 2, pp. 146—147. [11,12] 

"One sees gardens measuring only a few square feet, which offer nonetheless a bit 
of greenery in which to read a book; here and there, even a bird is chirping. — But 
the Place Saint-Georges is an altogether charming spot. Rustic and urban tastes 
are blended here. It is surrounded by buildings that look toward the city on one 
side and toward the country on the other." Add to this fountains, terraces, green- 
houses, flower heds. L. Rellstah, Paris im Friihjahr 1843: Briefe, Berichte and 
Schilderu.ngen (Leipzig, 1844), vol. 1, pp. 55-56. [lla,l] 

"Paris is between two layers, a layer of water and a layer of air. The layer of water, 
lying at a considerable depth underground, ... is furnished by the hed of green 
sandstone lying hetween the chalk and the Jurassic limestone. This bed can be 
represented hy a disk with a radius of seventy miles. A multitude of rivers and 
hrooks filter into it: we drink the Seine, the Marne, the Yonne, the Oise, the Aisne, 
the Cher, the Vienne, and the Loire in a single glass of water from the well of 
Crenelle. The layer of water is salubrious; it comes first from heaven, then from 
the earth. The layer of air is unwholesome, it comes from the sewers." Victor 
Hugo, Oeuvres completes, novels, vol. 9 (Paris, 1881), p. 182 (Les Miserables). 2 

[lla,2] 



At the heginning of the nineteenth century, there were still trains de bois (timher 
rafts'.'') going down the Seine; and Ch. F. Viel finds fault, in his work De I'Impuis- 



sance des mathematiques pour assurer la solidite des batiments, with the piers of 
the Pont clu Louvre, on which such rafts are clashed to pieces. [Ha, 3] 



On the "nets of Saint-Cloud" we have the testimony of Mercier {Tableau de Paris 
[Amsterdam, 1782], vol. 3, p. 197), among others: "The hodies of those unfortu- 
nates who have drowned are pulled up (except when the river is iced over) hy the 
nets of Saint-Cloud." There are many, such as Dulaure, who speak of these nets; 
others, like Gozlan and Touchard-Lafosse, deny they ever existed. The archives of 
the Seine make no mention of them. Tradition maintains that they stopped being 
used in 1810. This according to Firmin Maillard, Recherches historiques et cri- 
tiques sur la Morgue (Paris, 1860). The last chapter of this hook (p. 137): "Les 
Filets de Saint-Cloud." [lla,4] 

On "an underground river in Paris," which was, in large part, covered over at the 
beginning of the seventeenth century: "The stream thus . . . descended gradually 
along the slope, all the way to the house which, as early as the fifteenth century, 
had two salmon on its signhoard, and which would he replaced hy the Passage du 
Saumon. There, having swelled with the added flow of water coming from Les 
Halles, it plunged underground at the site where the Rue Mandar begins today, 
and where the entrance of the great sewer, which had long stood open, gave way 
. . . , after Thermidor . . . , to busts of Marat and Saint-Fargeau. . . . The stream 
disappeared ... in the currents of the Seine, well helow the city. ... It was quite 
enough that this filthy stream created a stench in the districts it crossed, which 
happened to he among the most populous in Paris. . . . When the Plagne broke out 
here, its first manifestations were in those streets which the stream, hy its in- 
fectious contiguity, had already made a center of disease." Edouard Fournier, 
Enigmes des rues de Paris (Paris, 1860), pp. 18-19, 21-22 ("Une Riviere souter- 



"We recall the divine lamp with the silver hurner, shining 'white like an electric 
light,' as it passes, in Les Chants de Maldoror, slowly down the Seine through 
Paris. Later, at the other extreme of the Cycle, in Fantimas, the Seine will also 
come to know, near the Quai de Javel, "inexplicable flashes of light in its depths." 
Roger Caillois, "Paris, mythe moderne," Nouvelle Revue francaise, 25, no. 284 



"The quays of the Seine likewise owe their realization toHaussmann. It was only 
in his day that the walkways were constructed up above and the trees planted 
down helow, along the banks; and these are what serve to articulate the form of 
that great thoroughfare, with its avenues and boulevards, that is the river." Fritz 



rain dans Paris"). 



[12,1] 



(May 1,1937), p. 687. 



[12,2] 



Stahl, Paris (Berlin <1929>), p. 177. 



[12,3] 



"If Lutetia was not yet in direct communication with the great cities of northern 
lands, it was nevertheless on the commercial route that ran overland beside the 
river. ... It was the great Roman way along the Right Bank which became the Rue 



Saint-Martin. At the crossroads of Chateau-Landon, a second route branched off, 
that of Senlis. A third, the Melun road, a pathway cut through a thick marsh near 
the Bastille, came into existence perhaps, at the height of the empire . . . ; this 
would become the Rue Saint-Antoine." Dubech and d'Espezel, Histoire de Paris 



"Turning off from the boulevards, let us go down the Rue de Rougemont. You will 
notice that the Comptoir d'Escompte < Discount Banlo occupies the bottom of a 
marked depression: you are in the earliest bed of the Seine." Dubech and 



"The bourgeois center, Paris Ville, sharply distinguished from Paris Cite, grew up 
on the Right Bank and on the bridges which, at that time, were erected every- 
where. The most influential segment of the population consisted of the merchants; 
here again, the hanse <merchants' guild) did its part to steer business to the water. 
The most important marketplace arose on a spot near the Church of Saint- 
Eustache, where the street by which ocean fish arrived crossed the street on which 
the marsh farmers of the region brought their vegetables to town. It Ls the same 
spot on which, today, the central market halls stand." Fritz Stahl, Paris (Berlin 



(Paris, 1926), p. 19. 



[12,4] 



d'Espezel, Histoire de Paris (Paris, 1926), p. 14. 



[I2a,l] 



<1929>), p. 67. 



[I2a,2] 