[Idleness] 



Noteworthy conjunction: in ancient Greece, practical labor is branded and pro- 
scribed. Although essentially left in the hands of slaves, it is condemned not least 
because it betrays a base aspiration for earthly goods (riches). This view after- 
ward plays a part in the denigration of the tradesman as the servant of Mammon: 
"Plato, in the Laws (VIII, 846), decrees that no citizen shall engage in a mechani- 
cal trade; the word banausos, signifying 'artisan,' becomes synonymous with 'con- 
temptible' . . . ; everything relating to tradespeople or to handwork carries a 
stigma, and deforms the soul together with the body. In general, those who 
practice these professions ... are busy satisfying . . . this 'passion for wealth . . . 
which leaves none of us an hour's leisure." Aristotle, for his part, opposes the 
excess of the chrematistic to . . . the prudence of domestic economy. ... In this 
way, the scorn felt for the artisan is extended to the merchant: in comparison to 
the liberal life, as absorbed in studious leisure (schole, otium), the affairs of trade 
(neg-otium, ascholia), 'business affairs,' have mostly a negative value." Pierre- 
Maxime Schuhl, Machinume et philosophic (Paris, 1938), pp. 11-12. [ml,l] 

Whoever enjoys leisure escapes Fortuna; whoever embraces idleness falls under 
her power. The Fortuna awaiting a person in idleness, however, is a lesser god- 
dess than the one that the person of leisure has fled. This Fortuna is no longer at 
home in the vita activa; her headquarters is the world at large. 2 "The artists of the 
Middle Ages depict those men who pursue an active life as bound to the wheel of 
fortune, ascending or descending according to the direction in which it turns, 
while the contemplative man remains inunobile at the center." P.-M. Schuhl, 
Machinisme et philosophic (Paris, 1938), p. 30. [ml ,2] 

Re the characterization of leisure. Sainte-Beuve, in his essay on Joubert: "'To 
converse and to seek to know — it was in this above all that, according to Plato, the 
happiness of private life consisted.' This class of connoisseurs and amateurs . . . 
has practically disappeared in France, now that everyone here has a trade." Cor- 
respondance de Joubert (Paris, 1924), p. xcix. [ml, 3] 

In bourgeois society, indolence — to take up Marx's word — has ceased to be 
"heroic." (Marx speaks of the "victory ... of industry over a heroic indolence." 



Bilani derpreussuchen Revolution, in Gesammelte Schriften von Karl Marx und Fried- 
rich Engeh, vol. 3 [Stuttgart, 1902], p. 2 ll.) 3 [mla,l] 



In the figure of the dandy, Baudelaire seeks to find some use for idleness, just as 
leisure once had a use. The vita contemplativa is replaced by something that could 
be called the vita contemptiva. (Compare part 3 of my manuscript <"Das Paris des 
Second Empire bei Baudelaire">.) [mla,2] 

Experience is the outcome of work; immediate experience is the phantasmagoria 
of the idler.' 1 [mla,3] 

In place of the force field that is lost to humanity with the devaluation of experi- 
ence, a new field of force opens up in the form of planning. The mass of un- 
known uniformities is mobilized against the confirmed multiplicity of the 
traditional. To "plan" is henceforth possible only on a large scale. No longer on 
an individual scale — and this means neither for the individual nor by the individ- 
ual. Valery therefore says, with reason: "The long-hatched enterprises, the pro- 
found designs of a Machiavelli or a Richelieu, would today have the reliability 
and value of a good tip on the Stock Exchange." Paul Valery, Oeuvres completes, 
J <(Paris, 1938), p. 30>. [mla,4] 

The intentional correlate of "immediate experience" has not always remained the 
same. In the nineteenth century, it was "adventure." In our day, it appears as 
"fate," Schicksal. In fate is concealed the concept of the "total experience" that is 
fatal from the outset. War is its unsurpassed prefiguration. ("I am born German; 
it is for this I die" — the trauma of birth already contains the shock that is mortal. 
This coincidence <Koinzidenz> defines "fate.") [mla,5] 

Would it be empathy with exchange value that first qualifies the human being for 
a "total experience"? [mla,6] 

With the trace <Spur>, a new dimension accrues to "immediate experience." It is 
no longer tied to the expectation of "adventure"; the one who undergoes an 
experience can follow the trace that leads there. Whoever follows traces must not 
only pay attention; above all, he must have given heed already to a great many 
things. (The hunter must know about the hoof of the animal whose trail he is on; 
he must know the hour when that animal goes to drink; he must know the course 
of the river to which it turns, and the location of the ford by which he himself can 
get across.) In this way there comes into play the peculiar configuration by dint of 
which long experience appears translated into the language of immediate experi- 
ence. 3 Experiences can, in fact, prove invaluable to one who follows a trace — but 
experiences of a particular sort. The hunt is the one type of work in which they 
function intrinsically. And the hunt is, as work, very primitive. The experiences 
<Erfahrungen> of one who attends to a trace result only very remotely from any 
work activity, or are cut off from such a procedure altogether. (Not for nothing do 
we speak of "fortune hunting.") They have no sequence and no system. They are 



a product of chance, and have about them the essential interminability that 
distinguishes the preferred obligations of the idler. The fundamentally unBirish- 
able collection of things worth knowing, whose utility depends on chance, has its 
prototype in study. [m2,l] 

Idleness has little about it that is representative, though it is far more widely 
exhibited than leisure. The man of the middle class has begun to be ashamed of 
labor. He to whom leisure no longer means anything in itself is happy to put his 
idleness on display. [m2,2] 

The intimate association between the concept of idleness and the concept of 
study was embodied in the notion of studio. Especially for the bachelor, the studio 
became a sort of pendant to the boudoir. [m2,3] 

Student and hunter. The text is a forest in which the reader is hunter. Rustling in 
the underbrush — the idea, skittish prey, the citation — another piece "in the bag." 
(Not every reader encounters the idea.) [m2a,l] 

There are two social institutions of which idleness forms an integral part: the 
news service and nightlife. They require a specific form of work-preparedness. 
This specific form is idleness. [m2a,2] 

News service and idleness. Feuilletonist, reporter, photographer constitute a gra- 
dation in which waiting around, the "Get ready" succeeded by the "Shoot," 
becomes ever more important vis-a-vis other activities. [m2a,3] 

What distinguishes long experience from immediate experience is that the for- 
mer is inseparable from the representation of a continuity, a sequence. The 
accent that falls on immediate experience will be the more weighty in proportion 
as its substrate is remote from the work of the one having the experience — from 
the work distinguished by the fact that it draws on long experience precisely 
where, for an outsider, it is at most an immediate experience that arises. [m2a,4] 

In feudal society, leisure — freedom from labor — was a recognized privilege. In 
bourgeois society, it is no longer so. What distinguishes leisure, as feudalism 
understands it, is that it communicates with two socially important types of 
behavior. Religious contemplation and court life represented, as it were, the 
matrices through which the leisure of the grand seigneur, of the prelate, of the 
warrior could be molded. These attitudes — that of piety no less than that of 
representation — were advantageous to the poet. His work in turn benefited 
them, at least indirectly, insofar as it maintained contact with both the religion 
and the life at court. (Vbltaire was the first of the great literati to break with the 
church; so much the less did he disdain to secure a place at the court of Frederick 
the Great.) In feudal society, the leisure of the poet is a recognized privilege. It is 
only in bourgeois society that the poet becomes an idler. [m2a,5] 



Idleness seeks to avoid any sort of tie to the idler's line of work, and ultimately to 
the labor process in general. That distinguishes it from leisure. [m3,l] 



"All religious, metaphysical, historical ideas are, in the last analysis, merely 
preparations derived from the great experiences of the past — representations of 
the experience." Wilhelm Dilthey, Das Erlebnis unci die Dichtung (Leipzig and 
Berlin, 1929), p. 198. [m3,2] 

Closely connected with the shattering of long experience is the shattering of 
juridical certitudes. "In the liberalist period, economic predominance was gener- 
ally associated with legal ownership of the means of production. . . . But after the 
development of technology in the last century had led to a rapidly increasing 
concentration ... of capital, the legal owners were largely excluded from . . . 
management. . . . Once the legal owners are cut off from the real productive 
process . . . , their horizon narrows; . . . and finally the share which they still have 
in industry due to ownership . . . comes to seem socially useless. . . . The idea of 
a right with a fixed content, and independent of society at large, loses its impor- 
tance." We finally arrive at "the loss of all rights with a determined content, a loss 
. . . given its fullest form in the authoritarian state." Max Horkheimer, "Tradi- 
tionelle mid Kritische Theorie," ^eitsckrift jur Sozialforschung, no. 2 (1937), 
pp. 285-287. Compare Horkheimer, "Bemerkungen zur philosophischen An- 
thropologic," £eitschrift fur Sozialforschung, no. 1 (1935), p. 12. 6 [m3,3] 

"The authentic field of operations for the vivid chronicle of what is happening is 
the documentary account of immediate experience, reportage. It is directly aimed 
at the event, and it holds fast to the experience. This presupposes that the event 
also becomes an immediate experience for the journalist reporting on it. . . . The 
capacity for having an experience is therefore a precondition ... of good . . . 
professional work." <Emil> Dovifat, "Formen und Wirkungsgesetze des Stils in 
der Zeitung," Deutsche Presse, July 22, 1939 (Berlin), p. 285. [m3,4] 

Apropos of the idler: the archaic image of ships in Baudelaire. [m3,5] 

The stringent work ethic and moral doctrine of Calvinism, it may be said, is most 
intimately related to the development of the vita contemplative.. It sought to build 
a dam to stem the melting of time into idleness, once such time was frozen in 
contemplation. [m3a,l] 

On the feuilleton. It was a matter of injecting experience — as it were, intrave- 
nously — with the poison of sensation; that is to say, highlighting within ordinary 
experience the character of immediate experience. 7 To this end, the experience of 
the big-city dweller presented itself. The feuilletonist turns this to account. He 
renders the city strange to its inhabitants, hie is thus one of the first technicians 
called up by the heightened need for immediate experiences. (The same need is 



evinced in the theory of "modern beauty" expounded by Poe, Baudelaire, and 
Berlioz. In this type of beauty, surprise is a ruling element.) [m3a,2] 



The process of the atrophy of experience is already underway within manufac- 
turing. In other words, it coincides, in its beginnings, with the beginnings of 
commodity production. (Compare Marx, Z)«u Kapitcd <vol. 1>, ed. Korsch <Ber- 
lin, 1932>, p. 336.) 8 ' [m3a,3] 



Phantasmagoria is the intentional correlate of immediate experience. [m3a,4] 

Just as the industrial labor process separates off from handicraft, so the form of 
communication corresponding to this labor process — information — separates off 
from the form of communication corresponding to the artisanal process of labor, 
which is storytelling. (See < Walter Benjamin,) "Der Erzahler," <Orient und Occi- 
dent, new series, no. 3 (October 1936)> p. 21, par. 3 through p. 22, par. 1, line 3; 
p. 22, par. 3, line 1 through the end of the Valery citation.) 3 This connection must 
be kept in mind if one is to form an idea of the explosive force contained within 
information. This force is liberated in sensation. With the sensation, whatever 
still resembles wisdom, oral tradition, or the epic side of truth is razed to the 
ground. [m3a,5] 

For the relations which the idler loves to enter into with the demimonde, "study" 
is an alibi. It may be asserted of the bohhne, in particular, that throughout its 
existence it studies its own milieu. [m3a,6] 



Idleness can be considered an early form of distraction or amusement. It consists 
in the readiness to savor, on one's own, an arbitrary succession of sensations. But 
as soon as the production process began to draw large masses of people into the 
field, those who "had the rime" came to feel a need to distinguish themselves en 
masse from laborers. It was to this need that the entertainment industry an- 
swered; and it immediately encountered specific problems of its own. Before very 
long, Saint-Marc Girardin was forced to conclude that "man is amusable only a 
small part of the time." (The idler does not tire as quickly as the man who amuses 
himself.) [m4,l] 



The tiue "salaried flaneur" (Henri Beraud's term) is the sandwich man. [m4,2] 



The idler's imitatio dei: as flaneur, he is omnipresent; as gambler, he is omnipo- 
tent; and as student, he is omniscient. This type of idler was first incarnated 
among the jeunesse doree. w [m4,3] 

"Empathy" comes into being through a declic, a kind of gearing action. With it, 
the inner life derives a pendant to the element of shock in sense perception. 
(Empathy is a synchronization, 11 in the intimate sense.) [m4,4] 



Habits are the armature of connected experiences. This armature is assailed by 
individual experiences. [m4,5] 



God has the Creation behind him; he rests from it. It is this God of the seventh 
day that the bourgeois has taken as the model for his idleness. In flanerie, he has 
the omnipresence of God; in gambling, the omnipotence; and in study, it is God's 
omniscience that is his. — This trinity is at the origin of the satanism in Baude- 
laire. — The idler's resemblance to God indicates that the old Protestant saying, 
"Work is the burgher's ornament," has begun to lose its validity. [m4,6] 

The world exhibitions were training schools in which the masses, barred from 
consuming, learned empathy with exchange value. "Look at everything; touch 
nothing." [m4,7] 

The classic description of idleness in Rousseau. This passage indicates, at one 
and the same time, that the existence of the idler has something godlike about it, 
and that solitude is a condition essential to the idler. In the last book of Les 
Confessions, we read that "the age for romantic plans was past. I had found the 
incense of vainglory stupefying rather than flattering. So the last hope I had left 
was to live . . . eternally at leisure. Such is the life of the blessed in the other 
world, and henceforth I thought of it as my supreme felicity in this. / Those who 
reproach me for my many inconsistencies will not fail to reproach me for this 
one, too. I have said that the idleness of society made it unbearable to me; and 
here I am, seeking for solitude solely in order to give myself up to idleness. . . . 
The idleness of society is deadly because it is obligatory; the idleness of solitude 
is delightful because it is free and voluntary," Jean Jacques Rousseau, Les Confes- 
sions, ed. Hilsum (Paris <1931>), vol. 4, p. 173. 12 [m4 a ,l] 

Among the conditions of idleness, particular importance attaches to solitude. It is 
solitude, in fact, that first emancipates — virtually — individual experience from 
every event, however trivial or impoverished: it offers to the individual experi- 
ence, on the high road of empathy, any passerby whatsoever as its substrate. 
Empathy is possible only to the solitary; solitude, therefore, is a precondition of 
authentic idleness. [m4a,2] 

When all lines are broken and no sail appears on the blank horizon, when no 
wave of immediate experience surges and crests, then there remains to the iso- 
lated subject in the grip of taediwn vitae one last thing — and that is empathy. 

[m4a,3] 

We may leave the question undecided as to whether, and in what sense, leisure is 
also determined by the order of production which makes it possible. We should, 
however, try to show how deeply idleness is marked by features of the capitalist 
economic order in which it flourishes. — On the other side, idleness, in the bour- 
geois society that knows no leisure, is a precondition of artistic production. And, 



often, idleness is the very thing which stamps that production with the traits that 
make its relation to the economic production process so drastic. [m4a,4] 

The student "never stops learning"; the gambler "never has enough"; for the 
flaneur, "there is always something more to see." Idleness has in view an unlim- 
ited duration, which fundamentally distinguishes it from simple sensuous pleas- 
ure, of whatever variety. (Is it correct to say that the "bad infinity" that prevails in 
idleness appears in Hegel as the signature of bourgeois society?) [m5,l] 

The spontaneity common to the student, to the gambler, to the flaneur is perhaps 
that of the hunter — which is to say, that of the oldest type of work, which may be 
intertwined closest of all with idleness. [m5,2] 

Plaubert's "Few will suspect how depressed one had to be to undertake the 
revival of Carthage" makes the connection between study and melencolia <sic> 
transparent. (The latter no doubt threatens not only this form of leisure but all 
forms of idleness.) Compare "My soul is sad and I have read all the books" 
(Mallarme); "Spleen II" and "La Voix" (Baudelaire); "Here stand I, alas, Philoso- 
phy / behind me" (Goethe) . 13 [m5,3] 

Again and again in Baudelaire, the specifically modern is there to be recognized 
as complement of the specifically archaic. In the person of the flaneur, whose 
idleness carries him through an imaginary city of arcades, the poet is confronted 
by the dandy (who weaves his way through the crowd without taking notice of 
the jolts to which he is exposed). 'Vet also in the flaneur a long-extinct creature 
opens a dreamy eye, casts a look that goes to the heart of the poet. It is the "son 
of the wilderness" — the man who, once upon a time, was betrothed, by a gener- 
ous nature, to leisure. Dandyism is the last glimmer of the heroic in times of 
decadence. Baudelaire is delighted to find in Chateaubriand a reference to Ameri- 
can Indian dandies — testimony to the former golden age of these tribes. [m5,4] 

On the hunter type in the flanenr: "The mass of tenants and lodgers begins to stray 
from shelter to shelter in this sea of houses, like the hunters and shepherds of 
prehistory. The intellectual education of the nomad is now complete." Oswald 
Spengler, he Declin de V Occident < trans. M. Tazerout>, vol. 2, part 1 (Paris, 
1933), p. 140. H [m5,5] 



"Man as civilized heing, as intellectual nomad, is again wholly microcosmic, 
wholly homeless, as free intellectually as hunter and herdsman were free sensu- 
ally." Spengler, vol. 2, p. 125. 15 [m5,6] 