[Anthropological Materialism, History of Sects] 



Gustav: "Your bottom is . . . divine!" 
Berdoa: "And immortal as well, I hope." 
Gustav: "What?" 
Berdoa: "Nothing." 

— Grabbe, Herwg "flieodor von Gothland 1 



The grandiose and lachrymose Memoires de Chodruc-Duclos, edited by J. Arago 
and Edouard Gouin (Paris, 1843), in two volumes, are occasionally interesting as 
the rudiments of a physiology of the beggar. The long preface is unsigned and 
says nothing about the manuscript. The memoirs could be apocryphal. We read 
at one point: "Let there be no mistake about it: it is not the refusal that humiliates 
so much as the almsgiving. ... I never stretched out my hand in supplication. I 
would walk more quickly than the man who was going to accede to my request; 
passing him, I would open my right hand, and he would slip something into it" 
(vol. 2, pp. 11-12). At another point: "Water is sustaining! ... I gorged myself 
with water, since I had no bread" (vol. 2, p. 19). [pl,l] 

Scene in the dormitory of a prison at the beginning of the 1830s. The passage is 
cited in Benoist without indication of author: "In the evening, with the dormitory 
in an uproar, 'the republican workers, before going to bed, performed La Revolu- 
tion de 1830, a theatrical charade they had composed. It reproduced all the scenes 
of the glorious week, from the decision of Charles X and his ministers to sign the 
July Ordinances, to the triumph of the people. The battle on the barricades was 
represented hy a hattle with holsters carried on behind a lofty pile of beds and 
mattresses. At the end, victors and vanquished joined forces to sing "La Mar- 
seillaise. "'" Charles Benoist, "L'Homme de 1848," part 1, Revue des deux mondes 
(July 1, 1913), p. 147. The passage cited presumably comes from Chateaubriand. 

[pl.2] 

Ganneau. "The Mapah . . . appears to us under the aspect of the perfect dandy, 
who loves horses, adores women, and has a taste for the high life but is entirely 
impecunious. This lack of funds he makes up for through gamhling; he is a hahitue 
of all the gambling dens of the Palais-Royal. . . . He helieves himself destined to be 



the redeemer of man's better half, and . . . takes the title of Mapah, a named 
formed from the first syllables of the two words 'mama' and 'papa.' He goes on to 
say that all proper names should be modifi ed in this manner: you should no longer 
hear the name of your father, but rather should use the first syllable of your 
mother's maiden name combined with the first syllable of your father's name. And 
to mark the more clearly that he forever renounces his own former name . . . , he 
signs himself: 'He who was Ganneau.'" He distributes his pamphlets at the exits of 
theaters or sends them through the mail; he even tried to persuade Victor Hugo to 
patronize his doctrine. Jules Bertaut, "Le 'Mapah,'" Le Temps, September 21, 
1935. [pi, 3] 

Charles Louandre on the physiologies, which he charges with corruption of mor- 
als: "This dreary genre . . . has very quickly run its course. The physiology, as 
produced in 32mo format suitable to be sold ... to those out walking or driving, is 
represented in 1836, in the Bibliographie de la France, by two volumes; in 1838 
there are eight volumes listed; in 1841 there are seventy-six; in 1842, forty-four; 
fifteen the year following; and hardly more than three or four in the two years 
since then. From the physiology of individuals, one moved to the physiology of 
cities. There was Paris la nuit; Paris m, table; Paris dans I'eau; Paris « cheval; 
Paris pittoresque; Paris bohemien; Paris litteraire; Paris marie. Then came the 
physiology of peoples: Les Francais; Les Anglais peints par eux-memes. These 
were followed by the physiology of animals: Les Animaux peints par eux-memes et 
dessines par d'autres. Having finally run out of subjects, . . . the authors . . . 
turned in the end to portraying themselves, and gave us the La Physiologie des 
physiologistes." Charles Louandre, "Statistique litteraire: De la Production intel- 
lcctuelle en France depuis quinze ans," Revue des deux mondes (November 15, 
1847), pp. 686-687. [pla,l] 

Theses of Toussenel: "That the happiness of individuals is in direct proportion to 
female authority"; "that the rank of the species is in direct proportion to female 
authority." A. Toussenel, Le Monde des oiseaux, vol. 1 (Paris, 1853), p. 485. The 
first is the "formula of the gyrfalcon" (p. 39). [pla,2] 

Toussenel on his Monde des oiseaux: "The world of birds is only its incidental 
subject, whereas the world of men is its principal subject." Vol. 1, p. 2 (preface by 
the author). [pla,3] 

Toussenel in his preface to Le Monde des oiseaux: "He [the author] has sought to 
underline the importance of the culinary side of his subject by according the item 
"roast meat" a more prominent place than it usually occupies in scientific works. " 
Vol. 1, p. 2. [pla,4] 



"We admire the hird . . . because with the bird, as in all well-organized politics, 
. . . it is gallantry that determines rank. . . . We feel instinctively that the woman, 
who came from the Creator's hand after the man, was made to command the latter, 



just as he was horn to command the beasts who came before him" <Le Monde des 
oiseaux, vol. 1, p. 38>. [pla,5] 



According to Toussenel, the races that most look up to the woman stand highest: at 
times the Germans, but above all the French and the Greeks. "As the Athenian 
and the Frenchman are denoted by the falcon, so are the Roman and the English- 
man by the eagle." (The eagle, however, "does not rally to the service of human- 
ity.") A. Toussenel, he Monde des oiseaux, vol. 1 (Paris, 1853), p. 125. [pla,6] 

Comic physiologies: Musee pour rire; Musee Philipon; Musee or Magasin com- 
ique; Musee Parisien; Les Metamorphoses du jour. [p2,l] 

Series of drawings. Les Vesuviennes, by Beaumont: twenty prints. Daumier's se- 
ries Les Divorceuses <Divorced Women) . A series (by whom?) titled Les Bas-bleus 
<The Bluestockings > . 2 [p2,2] 

Rise of the physiologies: "The burning political struggle of the years 1830-1835 
had formed an army of draftsmen, . . . and this army . . . was completely knocked 
out, politically speaking, by the September Laws. At a time, that is, when they had 
fathomed all the secrets of their art, they were suddenly restricted to a single 
theater of operations: the description of bourgeois life. . . . This is the circum- 
stance that explains the colossal revue of bourgeois life inaugurated around the 
middle of the 1830s in France. . . . Everything came into the picture: . . . happy 
days and sad days, work and recreation, marriage customs and bachelor habits, 
family, house, child, school, society, theater, types, professions." Eduard Fuchs, 
Die Karikatur der europiiischen Volker, 4th ed. (Munich <1921>), vol. 1, p. 362. 

[p2,3] 

What sordidness once again, at the end of the century, in the representation of 
physiological affairs! Characteristic of this is a description of impotence in Mail- 
lard's book on the history of women's emancipation, which in its overall han- 
dling of the matter lays bare, in drastic fashion, the reaction of the established 
bourgeoisie to anthropological materialism. In connection with the presentation 
of Claire Demar's doctrine, one finds that "she . . . speaks of the deceptions that 
can result from that strange and enormous sacrifice, at the risk of which, under a 
torrid Italian sky, more than one young man tries his luck at becoming a famous 
c/ianteur." Firmin Maillard, La Ugende de la femme anaticipee (Paris), p. 98. 

[p2,4] 

A key passage from the manifesto of Claire Demar: "The union of the sexes in the 
future will have to be the result of . . . deeply meditated sympathies . . . ; this will 
he the case even where the existence of an intimate, secret, and mysterious rapport 
between two souls has been recognized. . . . All such relations could very well come 
to nothing in the face of one last, indispensable, and decisive test: the TEST of 
MATTER by MATTER, the ASSAY of FLESH by flesh!!! . . . Often enough, on the very 



threshold of the hedroom, a devouring flame has come to he extinguished; often 
enough, for more than one grand passion, the perfumed hedsheets have become a 
death shroud. More than one person . . . who will read these lines has entered, at 
night, into the bed of Hymen, palpitating ivith desires and emotions, only to 
awaken in the morning cold and icy.' 17 Claire Demar, Ma Loi d'avenir (Paris, 



Re anthropological materialism. Conclusion of Claire Demar's Ma Loi d'avenir 
<My Law of the Future): "No more motherhood, no more law of blood. I say: no 
more motherhood. And, in fact, the woman emancipated . . . from the man, who 
then no longer pays her the price of her body, . . . will owe her existence ... to her 
works alone. For this it is necessary that the woman pursue some work, fulfill a 
function. And how can she do this if she is always condemned to give up a more or 
less large part of her life to the care and education of one or more children? . . . 
You want to emancipate the woman? Well, then, take the newborn child from the 
breast of the blood-mother and give it into the arms of the social mother, a nurse 
employed by the state, and the child will be better raised. . . . Then, and then only, 
will man, woman, and child be freed from the law of blood, from the exploitation 
of humanity by humanity." Claire Demar, Ma Loi d'avenir: Ouvrage posthume 
pnblie par Suzanne (Paris, 1834), pp. 58-59. [p2a,l] 

"What! Because a woman would rather not take the public into her confidence 
concerning her feelings as a woman; hecause, from among all the men who would 
lavish their attentions upon her, . . . only she could say which one she prefers — 
... is she then ... to become . . . the slave of one man? . . . What! In such cases a 
woman is exploited. . . . For if she were not afraid of seeing them tear themselves to 
pieces, . . . she could give satisfaction to several men at once in their love. ... I 
believe, with M. James de Laurence, in the need . . . for a freedom without . . . 
limits , . . . a freedom founded on mystery, which for me is the basis of the new 
morality." Claire Demar, Ma Loi d'avenir (Paris, 1834), pp. 31-32. [p2a,2] 

The demand for "mystery" — as opposed to "publicity" — in sexual relations is 
closely connected, in Demar, with the demand for more or less extended trial 
periods. Of course, the traditional fonn of marriage would in general be sup- 
planted by this more flexible fonn. It is logical, furthermore, that these concep- 
tions should give rise to the demand for matriarchy. [p2a,3] 

From the arguments directed against patriarchy: "Ah, it is with a huge pile of 
parricidal daggers at my side that, amid widespread groans of lamentation at the 
very mention of the words 'father' and 'mother,' I venture to raise my voice . . . 
against the law of hlood, the law of generation!" Claire Demar, Ma Loi d'avenir 



1834), pp. 36-37. 



[ P 2,5] 



(Paris, 1834), pp. 54-55. 



[p2a,4] 



Caricature plays a considerable role in the development of the caption. It is 
characteristic that Henri Bouchot, La Lithsg-tphie (Paris <1895>) <p. 114>, re- 
proaches Daumier with the length and indispensability of his captions. [p2a,5] 



Henri Bonchot, La Lithographie (Paris), p. 138, compares the productivity of 
Deveria with that of Balzac and Dumas. [p2a,6] 



Several passages from Claire Demar's work Ma Loi d'avenir may be cited by way 
of characterizing her relation to James de Laurence. The fir st comes from the 
foreword written by Suzanne and has its point of departure in Claire Demar's 
refusal to contribute to La Tribune des femmes: "Up until the seventeenth issue, 
she had consistently refused, saying that the tone of this periodical was too 
moderate. . . . When this issue appeared, there was a passage in an article by me 
which, by its form and its moderation, exasperated Claire. — She wrote to me that 
she was going to respond to it. — But . . . her response became a pamphlet, which 
she then decided to publish on its own, outside the framework of the peri- 
odical. . . . Here, then, is the fragment of the article of which Claire has cited only 
a few lines. 'There is still in the world a man who interprets . . . Christianity ... in 
a manner . . . favorable to our sex: I mean M. James de Laurence, the author of a 
pamphlet entitled Les Enfants de dieu, ou La Religion de Jesus. . . . The author is 
no Saint-Sinionian; ... he postulates ... an inheritance through the mother. 
Certainly this system ... is highly advantageous to us; I am convinced that some 
part of it will have a place ... in the religion of the future, and that the principle 
of motherhood will become one of the fundamental laws of the state'" (Claire 
Demar, Ma loi d'avenir: Ouvr age posthume publie par Suzanne [Paris, 1834], pp. 14- 
16). In the text of her manifesto, Claire Demar makes common cause with 
Laurence against the reproaches leveled at him by La Tribune des femmes, which 
had claimed that he was advocating a form of "moral liberty . . . without rules or 
boundaries," something "which . . . would surely land us in a coarse and disgust- 
ing disorder." The blame for this is said to reside in the fact that in these things 
Laurence propounds mystery as a principle; on the strength of such mystery, we 
would have to render account in these things to a mystical God alone. La Tribune 
des Femmes, on the contrary, believes that "the Society of the Future will be 
founded not on mystery but on trust; for mystery merely prolongs the exploita- 
tion of our sex." Claire Demar replies: "Certainly, Mesdames, if, like you, I 
confused trust with publicity, and considered mystery as prolonging the exploita- 
tion of our sex, I would be bound to give my blessings to the times in which we 
live." She goes on to describe the brutality of the customs of these times: "Before 
the mayor and before the priest, ... a man and a woman have assembled a long 
train of witnesses. . . . Voila! . . . The union is called legitimate, and the woman 
may now without blushing affirm: 'On such and such a day, at such and such an 
hour, I shall receive a man into my woman's bed!!!' . . . Contracted in the presence 
of the crowd, the marriage drags along, across an orgy of wines and dances, 
toward the nuptial bed, which has become the bed of debauchery and prostitu- 
tion, inviting the delirious imagination of the guests to follow ... all the details 
... of the lubricious drama enacted in the name of the Wedding Day! If the 
practice which thus converts a young bride . . . into the object of impudent 
glances . . . , and which prostitutes her to unrestrained desires, . . . does not 
appear to you a horrible exploitation, . . . then I know not what to say" (Ma Loi 
d'avenir, pp. 29-30). [p3 5 l] 



Publication date of the first issue of Le Charivari: December 1, 1832. [p3,2] 



Lesbian confession of a Saint-Simonienne: "I hegan to love my fellow woman as 
much as my fellow man. ... I left to the man his physical strength and his brand of 
intelligence in order to exalt at his side, and with equal right, the physical beauty 
of the woman and her distinctively spiritual gifts." Cited without indication of 
source or author in Firmin Maillard, La Legende de lafemme emancipee (Paris), 
p. 65. [p3a,l] 



Empress Eugenie as successor to the Mother: 

Should you wish, O blessed one, 
The whole of humankind with joy 
Will hail its EUGENIE — 
Archangel guiding us to port!! ! 

Jean Journet, L'Ere de lafemme, on he Regne de Vharmonie universelle (January 
1857), p. 8. <See U14a,4 and U17a,2.> [ p 3a,2] 



Maxims from James de Laurence, Les Enfant s de dieu, ou La Religion de Jesus 
reconciliee avec la philosophie (Paris, June 1831): "It is more reasonahle to claim 
that all children are made hy God than to say that all married couples are joined 
together hy God" (p. 14). The fact that Jesus does not condemn the woman taken 
in adultery leads Laurence to conclude that he did not approve of marriage: "He 
pardoned her hecause he considered adultery the natural consequence of mar- 
riage, and he would have accepted it were it to he found among his disciples. . . . 
As long as marriage exists, an adulterous woman will be found criminal because 
she hurdens her hushand with the children of others. Jesus could not tolerate such 
an injustice; his system is logical: he wanted children to belong to the mother. 
Whence those remarkable words: 'Call no man your father on earth, for you have 
one Father, who is in heaven'"' (p. 13). "The children of God, as descended from 
one woman, form a single family. . . . The religion of the Jews was that of pater- 
nity, under which the patriarchs exercised their domestic authority. The religion 
of Jesus is that of maternity, whose symhol is a mother holding a child in her arms; 
and this mot her is called the Virgin hecause, while fulfilling the duties of a mother, 
she had not renounced the independence of a virgin" (pp. 13-14 ). [p3a,3] 

"Some sects . . . , during the first centuries of the church, seem to have divined the 
intentions of Jesus; the Simonians, the Nicolaitans, the Carpocratians, the 
Basilidians, the Marcionites, and others . . . not only had abolished marriage but 
had established the community of women." James de Laurence, Les Enfants de 
dieu, ou La Religion de Jesus reconciliee avec la philosophie (Paris, June 1831), 
p. 8. [ P 3a,4] 

The interpretation of the miracle at Cana' 1 which James de Laurence offers, in an 
effort to prove his thesis that Jesus stood opposed to marriage, is wholly in the 
style of the early Middle Ages: "Seeing the wedded pair make a sacrifice of their 




The Fourierist missionary Jean Joumet, ca. 1858. Photo by Natlar. Courtesy of the Bib- 
liotheque Nationale de France. See p3a,2. 



liberty, he changed the water into wine so as to demonstrate that marriage was a 
foolhardy venture undertaken only by people whose brains are addled by wine." 
James de Laurence, Les Enfants de diea, ou La Religion de Jesus reconciliee avec la 
philosophie (Parisjune 1831), p. 8. [p4,l] 

"The Holy Spirit, or the soul of nature, descended upon the Virgin in the form of a 
dove; and since the clove is the symbol of love, this signifies that the mother of 



Jesus had yielded to the natural inclination for love." James de Laurence, Les 
Enfmnts de dieu (Paris, June 1831), p. 5. [p4,2] 



Some of Laurence's theoretical motifs are already evident in his four-volume 
novel, he Panorama des boudoirs, ou L'Empire des Nairs (Paris, 1817), which 
was published earlier in Germany and of which a fragment had appeared in 1793 
in Wieland's Deutsche Merkur. Laurence (Lawrence) was English. [p4,3] 

"Balzac has described the physiognomy of the Parisian in unforgettable fashion: 
the faces drawn taut, tormented, livid, 'the almost infernal complexion of Parisian 
physiognomies'; 3 not faces but masks." Ernst Robert Curtius, Balzac (Bonn, 
1923), p. 243. (Citation from La Fille auxyeux d'or.) [p4,4] 

"Balzac's interest in longevity is one of the things he has in common with the 
eighteenth century. The naturalists, the philosophers, the charlatans of that age 
are agreed on this point. . . . Condorcet expected from the future era, which he 
painted in glowing colors, an infinite prolongation of the life span. Count Saint- 
Germain dispensed a 'tea of life,' Cagliostro an 'elixir of life'; others promoted 
'sidereal salts,' 'tincture of gold,' 'magnetic beds. '" Ernst Robert Curtius, Balzac 
(Bonn, 1923), p. 101. [p4,5] 

In Fourier {Nouveau Monde <Paris, 1829— 1830>, p. 275) there are outcries against 
wedding rites that recall the pronouncements of Claire Demar. [p4,6] 

Note of Blanqui's from the spring of 184.6, when he was imprisoned in the Hospital 
of Tours: "On Communion days, the sisters of the hospice of Tours are unap- 
proachable, ferocious. They have eaten God. They are churning with the pride of 
this divine digestion. These vessels of holiness become flasks of vitriol." < Cited in> 
Gustave Geffroy, L'Enferme (Paris, 1926), vol. 1, p. 133. [p4,7] 

Apropos of the wedding at Cana. 1848: "A banquet for the poor was planned; it 
was to offer, for twenty-live centimes, bread, cheese, and wine, which would be 
eaten and drunk on the plain of Saint-Denis. It did not take place (initially sched- 
uled for June 1, it was postponed to June 18, then to July 14); but the preparatory 
meetings that were held, the subscriptions that were collected, and the enroll- 
ments — which had mounted, by June 8, to 165,532 — served to stir up public opin- 
ion." Gustave Geffroy, L 'Enferme (Paris, 1926), vol. 1, p. 192. [p4a,l] 

"In 1848, in the room of Jenny the worker, there were portraits of Beranger, 
Napoleon, and the Madonna pinned to the wall. People felt certain that the relig- 
ion of Humanity was about to emerge. Jesus is a great man of '48. Among the 
masses, there were indications of a faith in omens. . . . The Almanack pro phetique 
of 1849 announced the return of the comet of 1264 — the warrior comet, produced 
by the influence of Mars." Gustave Geffroy, L'Enferme (Paris, 1926), vol. I, 
p. 156. [p4a,2] 



Bahick, deputy of the tenth arrondissement, Pole, worker, then tailor, then per- 
fumer. "He was ... a member of the International and of the Central Committee, 
and at the same time an apostle of the f usionist cult — a religion of recent inspira- 
tion, intended for the use of brains like his. Formed hy a certain M. de Toureil, it 
combined . . . several cults, to which Babick had conjoined spiritualism. As a 
perfumer, he had created for it a language which, for lack of other merits, was 
redolent of drugs and ointments. He would write at the top of his letters 'Paris- 
Jerusalem,' date them with a year of the fusionist era, and sign them 'Babick, 
child of the Kingdom of God, and perfumer. 1 " Georges Laronze, Histoire de la 
Commune de 1871 (Paris, 1928), pp. 168-169. [p4a,3] 

"The whimsical idea conceived by the colonel of the twelfth legion was no more 
felicitous. It entailed forming a company of female citizen volunteers who were 
charged, for the greater shame of lawbreakers, with securing their arrest." 
Georges Laronze, Histoire de la Commune de 1871 (Paris, 1928), p. 5#1. [p4a,4] 

Fusionisme begins its reckoning of time with December 30, 1845. [p4a,5] 

Maxime Du Camp, in his Souvenirs litteraires, makes a play on words with 
"Evadians" and "evaders." <See al5,2-4.> [p4a,6] 

From the constitution of the Vesuviennes: "Female citizens ought to do their part 
to serve the armies of land and sea. . . . The enlisted will form an army to be 
designated as reserve. It will he divided into three contingents: the corps of women 
workers, the corps of vivandieres, and the corps of charity. . . . Since marriage is 
an association, each of the two spouses must share in all the work. Any husband 
refusing to perform his portion of domestic duties will be condemned ... to as- 
sume responsibility for the service of his wife in the Garde Civique, in place of his 
own service in the Garde Nationale." Firmin Maillard, La Legende de lafemme 
emancipee (Paris), pp. 179, 181. [p5 , 1 ] 

"The feelings Hegel stirred up among the members of Young Germany, and which 
fluctuated hetween strong attraction and even stronger repulsion, are reflected 
most vividly in Gustav Kiihne's Quarantine im Irrenhause < Quarantine in the 
Insane Asylum) .... Because the memhers of Young Germany placed the accent 
more on subjective volition than on objective freedom, the Young Hegelians 
heaped scorn upon the 'unprincipled meandering' of their 'helletristic ego- 
ism' .... Although the fear arose, within the ranks of Young Germany, that the 
inescapahle dialectic of Hegelian doctrine might deprive Youth of the strength . . . 
to act, this concern proved unjustified." Quite the contrary: once these young 
Germans "were forced to recognize, after the han on their writings was imposed, 
that they themselves had hurned the hands by whose diligent labors they had 
hoped to live like good bourgeois, their enthusiasm quickly vanished." Gustav 
Mayer, Friedrich Engels, vol. 1, Friedrich Engets in seiner Friihzeit (Berlin 
<1933>), pp. 37-39/' [p5,2] 



Around the time that "physiologies" first appeared, historians like Thierry, 
Mignet, Guizot were laying emphasis on the analysis of "bourgeois life." [p5,3] 



Engels on the Wuppertal region: "Excellent soil for our principles is being pre- 
pared here; and once we are able to set in motion our wild, hot-tempered dyers 
and bleachers, you won't recognize Wuppertal. Even as it is, the workers during 
the past few years have reached the final stage of the old civilization; the rapid 
increase in crimes, robberies, and murders is their protest against the old social 
organization. At night the streets are unsafe, the bourgeois are beaten up, knifed, 
and rohbed. If the local proletarians develop according to the same laws as the 
English proletarians, they will soon realize that it is useless to protest against the 
social system in this manner . . . and will protest in their general capacity, as 
human beings, by means of communism." Engels to Marx, October 1844., from 
Barmen [Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, Briefwechsel, ed. Marx-Engels-Lenin 
Institut, vol. 1 (<Zurich> 1935), pp. 4-5]. 7 [p5,4] 

The heroic ideal in Baudelaire is androgynous. This does not prevent him from 
writing: "Wfe have known the philanthropist woman author, the systematic priest- 
ess of love, the republican poetess, the poetess of the future, Fourierist or Saint- 
Simonian; and our eyes . . . have never succeeded in becoming accustomed to all 
this studied ugliness." Baudelaire, L'Art romantique, ed. Hachette, vol. 3 (Paris), 
p. 340 ("Marceline Desbordes-Valmore"). 8 [p5a,l] 

One of the later sectarian developments of the nineteenth century is the fusionist 
religion. It was propagated by L.J. B. Toureil (born in Year VIII, died 1863 [or 
1868?]). The Fouiierist influence can be felt in his periodization of history; from 
Saint-Simon comes the idea of the Trinity as a unity of Mother-Father to which 
Sister-Brother or Androgyne is joined. The universal substance is determined in 
its working by three processes, in the definition of which the inferior basis of this 
doctrine comes to light. These processes are: "Emanation, . . . the property which 
the universal substance possesses of expanding infinitely beyond itself; . . . Ab- 
sorption, . . . the property which the universal substance possesses of turning 
back infinitely upon itself; . . . Assimilation, . . . the property which the universal 
substance possesses of being intimately permeated with itself" (p. i). — A charac- 
teristic passage from the aphorism "Pauvres, riches" <Rich Men, Poor Men>, 
which addresses itself to the rich and speaks of the poor: "Moreover, if you refuse 
to elevate them to your level and scorn to involve yourselves with them, why 
then do you breathe the same air, inhabit the same atmosphere? In order not to 
breathe in and assimilate their emanation . . . , it will be necessary for you to 
leave this world, to breathe a different air and live in a different atmosphere" 
(p. 267).— The dead are "multiform" and exist in many places on the earth at the 
same time. For this reason, people must very seriously concern themselves, dur- 
ing their lifetime, with the betterment of the earth (p. 307). LJltimately, all unites 
in a series of suns, which in the end, after they have passed through the station of 
one light (unilumiere) , realize the "universal light" in the "universalizing region." 



Religion fusionienne, ou Doctrine de I'universalisation re'alisant le vrai catholicisme 
(Paris, 1902). [ P 5a,2] 



"Me: Is there some particular facet of your religious cult that you could comment 
on? M. de Tonreil: We pray often, and our prayers ordinarily hegin with the 
words: '0 Map supreme and eternal.' Me: What is the meaning of this sound 
'Map'? M. de Toureil: It is a sacred sound which combines the m signifying mere 
(mother), the p signifying pere (father), and the a signifying amour (love). . . . 
These three letters designate the great eternal God." Alexandre Erdan [A. A. 
Jacob], La France mistique, 2 vols. (Paris, 1855), vol. 2, p. 632 [continuous pagi- 
nation], [p6,l] 

Fusionisme aims not at a syncretism but at the fusion of human beings with one 
another and with God. [p6,2] 

"There will he no happiness for humanity until the day the republic sends the son 
of God back to the carpenter's shop of Monsieur his father." This sentence is put 
into the mouth of Courbet, in a pamphlet that presents the heroes of the February 
Revolution to the public. [p6,3] 