[Ecole Polytechnique] 



On commerce: "I ( competition between merchants, ... or any other matter, pre- 
vents them from selling their wares in timely fashion, then the individual merchant 
is forced ... to suspend business and cast the problem back onto the pro- 
ducers. . . . Tliis is why we cannot distinguish between commercial and industrial 
crises, so dependent is industry on intermediaries. ... A fearsome audit is con- 
ducted on all assets in circulation, and an enormous quantity of them are declared 
worthless. . . . The times when commercial assets are subjected to audit arc called 
crises." Eugene Buret, De la Misere des classes laborieuses en Angleterre et en 



"In 1860, having long slumbered in the arms of protectionism, France abruptly 
awakened 'on the pillow of free trade.' Exercising the right conferred on him by 
the constitution of 1852, Napoleon III had bypassed parliament and negotiated to 
open our borders to products from other nations, at the same time opening several 
foreign markets to our entrepreneurs. . . . Long years of prosperity had made it 
possible for our industrial forces ... to wage a global struggle." Henry Fougere, 
Les Delegations ouvrieres aux expositions universelles sous le Second Empire 



Founding of the Ecole Polytechnique: 1 "The Terror within, invaders at the bor- 
ders . . . ; the country in ruins, disorganized, able neither to acquire the saltpeter 
needed for gunpowder nor to run the factories needed for manufacturing arms 
(since nearly all these factories were in the hands of insurgents) — such were the 
circumstances in which deliberations were held to found the new institution. . . . 
'Everything that genius, lahor, and concerted action were capable of,' as Biot had 
put it, 'was now called up, so that France alone could sustain itself against all of 
Europe . . . for the duration of the war, however long and terrible it might prove to 
be'. . . . Characteristic of the Ecole Polytechnique . . . was the coexistence of 
purely theoretic st udies with a series o{vocationalcourses geared to civil engineer- 
ing, architecture, fortifications, mining, and even naval constructions. . . . Napo- 
leon . . . made residence in the barracks obligatory for students. . . . Then came 
the events of . . . 1815, after which . . . one no longer concealed the hope of seeing 
the Ecole recruit more students from aristoeratic families. . . . The institution thus 



France (Paris, 1840), vol. 2, pp. 211, 213. 



[rU] 



(Montlueon, 1905), p. 28. 



[rl,2] 



ceased to have the character of a preparatory school for public service. . . . Pure 
science was to gain nothing by this; for . . . the graduating classes ... of 1817 to 
1830 contributed hy far the lowest proportion of memhers to the Institut de 
France. ... In 1848, the Ecole was in danger of heing closed." A. de Lapparent, he 
Centenaue del 'Ecole polytechnique (Paris, 1894), pp. 6-7, 12-15. [rl,3] 

Vote of March 18, 1871, at the Ecole Polytechnique, on the position to he adopted 
vis-a-vis the Commune: "Some . . . wonder what this committee is that claims to 
have been elected hy the federation of 300,000 citizens. . . . Others . . . propose 
taking up the tradition of the past and putting themselves at the forefront of the 
movement. After a very lively hut peaceful discussion, a vote is held: the partisans 
of the Central Committee are fourteen in nuinher!" G. Pinet, Ilistoire de VEcole 
polytechnique (Paris, 1887), p. 293. [i"la,l] 

In 1871, the Ecole Polytechnique encountered justified mistrust. Voices were 
heard to say: "The Ecole is no longer what it was in 1830!" (Pinet, p. 297). 

[rla,2] 

Two characteristic passages from Edouard Foucaud, Pans inventeur: Physiologie de 
I'industrie frangaise (Paris, 1844), on the conception of industry and of the worker 
before 1848: "Industrial intelligence is the daughter of heaven. It loves and 
surrenders itself only to those whom society . . . calls manual laborers, those 
whom intelligent persons know as brothers or zfor/een" (p. 181). "Today, in the 
nineteenth century, the chattel of the Romans, . . . the serf of Charlemagne, the 
peasant of Francis I — this miserable trinity which slavery has brutalized but which 
the genius of emancipation has made radiant — is called the people" (pp. 220-221). 

[rla,3] 

"Without the advantages of wealth, ... or a narrow mind, . . . the worker finds 
retirement on an annuity to be oppressive. The sky above may well be cloudless, 
and his home may well be verdant, perfumed with flowers, and enlivened by the 
song of birds; yet his inactive mind remains insensible to the charms of solitude. 
If, by chance, his ear should catch some sharp noise coming from a distant 
manufacturing plant, or even the monotonous churning of a factory mill, then his 
countenance immediately brightens; he no longer notices the birdsongs or the 
perfumes. The thick smoke escaping from the factory's high chimney, the ringing 
of the anvil, make him tremble with joy. These things remind him of the good old 
days of manual labor motivated by a mind inspired." Edouard Foucaud, Paris 
inventeur: Pfysiologie de I'industrie frangaise (Paris, 1844), pp. 222-223. [rla,4] 

"'Amid the reigning disorder,' writes Vaulahelle, 'their well-known uniform, be- 
loved of all, gave them a sort of official character, which turned them into . . . the 
most active and most useful agents of the up and coming power'. . . . 'Whenever 
we had to give an order that required the backing of some kind of force,' says 
Mauguin, 'we would generally entrust its execution to a student of the Ecole 



Polytechnique. The student would descend the flight of stairs leading out from the 
Hotel de Ville. Before reaching the hottom step, he would address the crowd, 
which had hecome attentive; he would simply pronounce the words, "Two hun- 
dred men, ahle and wilJing!" Then he would complete his descent and turn alone 
into the street. At that very instant, one could see stepping forth from the walls 
and marching heliind him — some with rifles, others just with swords — one man, 
two men, twenty men, and then one hundred, four hundred, five hundred men; 
more than twice the number needed.'" G. Pinet, Histoire de I'Ecole polytechnique 
(Paris, 1887), pp. 156-157. [The two passages cited are from <Achille> Vaulahelle, 
Histoire des deux restaurations, vol. 8, p. 291, and a letter of M. Mauguin to La 
Presse, Saumur, March 8, 1853.] [r2,l] 

The students of the Ecole Polytechnique organize a relief fund to make it easier f or 
La Tribune to pay a fine. (Pinet, p. 220.) [r2,2] 

Lamartine in Destinies de la poesie, as cited in Michiels: "M. Lamartine, who has 
seen with his own eyes the intellectual servitude of the Empire, describes it. . . . 'It 
was a universal confederacy of the mathematical forms of study, in opposition to 
thinking and poetry. Number alone was permitted, was honored, protected, and 
paid. Since number does not think for itself, the military chief of that era had need 
of no other . . . henchman. '" Alfred Michiels, Histoire des idees litteraires en 
France au XIX s siecle (Paris, 1863), vol. 2, p . 94. [r2,3] 

Pinet < Histoire de I'Ecole polytechnique (Paris, 1887)> (p. viii) refers to the Ency- 
clopedistes as "the true founders" of the Ecole Polytechnique. [r2,4] 

"One tried hy every means possible, but always without success, to win the Ecole 
over to the cause of the Bourbons." Pinet, Histoire de I'Ecole polytechnique, 



Customs and precepts of the student body at the Ecole Polytechnique, as assem- 
bled in the "Code X." "It rested entirely on this one principle, which had been 
upheld ever since the school was founded: 'Any resolution voted through is obliga- 



Michelet on the Ecole Polytechnique and the Ecole Normale: "After those great 
trials, there seemed to be a moment of silence for all human passions; one might 
have thought that there was no longer any pride, self-interest, or envy. The leading 
men in the state and in science accepted the most humhle positions of public 
instruction. Lagrange and Laplace taught arithmetic. Fifteen hundred students — 
grown men who were in some cases already famous — came ... to take their seats 
at the Ecole Normale and to learn to teach. They came as best they could, in the 
depth of winter, at that time of poverty and famine. ... A great citizen, Carnot, 
. . . was the real founder of the Ecole Polytechnique. They learned with the zeal of 
soldiers. . . . Watching the uninterrupted inventions of their teachers, the students 



p. 86. 



[r2,5] 



tory, no matter what the consequences might be.'" Pinet, pp. 109-110. 



[r2,6] 



went on to invent as well. Imagine the spectacle of a Lagrange who suddenly 
stopped short in the middle of his lecture and was lost in thought. The room waited 
in silence. Finally he awoke and told them of his glowing new discovery, barely 
formed in his mind. . . . What a decline after those days! . . . After the reports 
made to the Convention, read those of Fourcroy and Fontanes; you sink . . . from 
manhood to old age." .1. Michelet, Le Peuple (Paris, 1846), pp. 336-338. 2 [r2a,l] 

"Parnassus of the triangle and the hypotenuse" — this is what Paul-Ernest de 
Rattier, in Paris n'existe pas (Paris, 1857), calls the Ecole Polytechnique (p. 19). 

[r2a,2] 

Ch. F. Viel, as an adversary of engineering construction, no less than as a royal- 
ist, was necessarily also an adversary of the Ecole Polytechnique. He laments the 
decline of architecture as art — a decline "that began with that terrible period when 
the throne of our king was toppled." Charles-Francois Viel, De la Cfmte imminente 
de la science de la construction des bitimens en France, vol. 1 (Paris, 1818), p. 53. The 
study of architecture as art is, according to him, more difficult than the mathe- 
matical theory of construction; as proof, he cites the many prizes won in tliis field 
by students of the Ecole Polytechnique. The author speaks contemptuously of 
the new educational arrangements — "these new institutions professing everything 
with everything else" — and he writes on the same page: "Let us pay homage here 
to the govermnent that has judged so well of the difference between mathematics 
and arclritecture, and which has preserved the special school in Paris for the 
teaching of this art, and recreated the private boarding school of Rome." Charles- 
Francois Viel, De I'bnpuusance des mathematiques pour assurer la solidite des bdti- 
mens (Paris, 1805), p. 63. Viel emphasizes (ibid., pp. 31-32) the irrational element 
in the genuine study of architecture: "The forms preexist the construction and 
constitute essentially the theory of the art of building," In 1819 {De la Chute . . . , 
vol. 2, p. 120), he is still denouncing "the attitude of the century toward the fine 
arts in general, which it puts in a class with the industrial arts." [r2a,3] 

From the time of Napoleon I, the Ecole Polytechnique was subject to continual 
reproach for providing practical training with an overly broad theoretical founda- 
tion. These criticisms led, in 1855, to proposals for reform, against which Arago 
took a most determined stand. At the same time, he dismissed the charge that the 
school had become a breeding ground of revolutionary animus: "I have been 
told of a reproach directed against polytechnical instruction, and according to 
which the mathematical disciplines — the study of differential calculus and of 
integral calculus, for example — would have the effect of transforming their stu- 
dents into socialists of the worst stamp. . . . How has it escaped the author of such 
a reproach that its immediate consequence is nothing less than to range the likes 
of a Huygens, a Newton, a Leibniz, a Euler, a Lagrange, a Laplace among the 
most hot-headed of demagogues? It is truly shameful that someone was led to 
make comparisons of this kind." <Francois> Arago, Sur I'ancienne Ecole polytech- 
nique (Paris, 1853), p. 42. [ r 3,l] 



In he Cure cle village, which Balzac wrote in the years 1837 to 1845, there are very 
violent attacks on the Ecole Polytechnique (coming in the letter of Gregoire 
Gerard to his patron, the banker Grossetete). Balzac fears that the forced study of 
the exact sciences would have devastating effects on the spiritual constitution and 
life span of the students. Still more characteristic are the following reflections: "I 
do not believe that any engineer who ever left the Ecole could build one of the 
miracles of architecture which Leonardo da Vinci erected — Leonardo who was at 
once engineer, architect, and painter, one of the inventors of hydraulic science, the 
indefatigable constructor of canals. They are so accustomed while not yet in their 
teens to the bald simplicity of geometry, that by the time they leave the Ecole they 
have quite lost all feeling for grace or ornament. A column, to their eyes, is a 
useless waste of material. They return to the point where art begins — on utility 
they take their stand, and stay there." H. de Balzac, he Cure cle village, ed. Siccle 
(Paris), p. 184. 3 [r3,2] 

Arago's speech on the question of fortifications 4 is directed against the report by 
Thiers and against Lamartine. The speech is dated January 29, 1841. One of its 
most important sections is headed: "The detached forts examined from the point 
of view of their political significance. Is it true that governments have never re- 
garded citadels as a means of subduing and suppressing populations?" From this 
section: "M. Thiers does not like to admit that any government, in order to control 
the population, would ever resort to bombarding the towns . . . This illusion cer- 
tainly does honor to his humanity and to his taste for fine arts; but . . . few others 
would share it. . . . And so . . . one may subscribe to the protestations of 1833 
against the detached forts and the smaller fortresses without incurring the epithet 
of 'philistine,' or 'madman,' or other such compliments." Arago, Sur les Forti- 
fications de Paris (Paris, 1841), pp. 87, 92-94. [r3,3] 

Arago fights for the "continuous enceinte'''' as opposed to the "detached forts": 
"The goal we should strive for, in fortifying Paris, is clearly to give this gigantic 
city the means of defending itself solely with the aid of its Garde Nationale, its 
workers, the population of surrounding areas, and some detachments of regular 
army troops. . . . This point granted, the best ramparts for Paris will be those the 
population finds to be best — the ramparts most intimately suited to the tastes, 
customs, ideas, and needs of an armed bourgeoisie. To pose the question in this 
manner is to reject out of hand the system of detached forts. Behind a continuous 
surrounding wall, the Garde Nationale would have news of their families at all 
times. The wounded would have access to care. In such a situation, the apprehen- 
sive guardsman would be as good as the seasoned veteran. On the other hand, we 
would he strangely deluded if we imagined that citizens under daily obligations as 
heads of families and as heads of businesses would go, without great reluctance, to 
shut themselves up within the four walls of a fort — that they would be prepared to 
sequester themselves at the very moment when circumstances of t he most pressing 
kind would demand their presence at the domestic hearth or at the counter, store, 
or workshop. I can already hear the response to such imperious demands: the 



forts will be occupied hy regular army troops! You admit then that, with a system 
of forts, the population could not defend itself alone. This is ... an immense, a 
terrible admission." Arago, Sur les Fortifications de Paris (Paris, 1841), pp. 80- 
81. [r3a,l] 



Marx on the June Insurrection: "In order to dispel the people's last illusion, in 
order to enable a complete break with the past, it was necessary for the customary 
poetic accompaniment of a French uprising, the enthusiastic youth of the bour- 
geoisie, the students of the Ecole Polytechnique, the three-cornered hats — all to 
take the side of the oppressors." Karl Marx, "Dem Andenken der Juni-Kampfer" 
[Karl Marx als Denker, Mensch und Revolution*.!; eel. D. Rjazanov (Vienna and 
Berlin < 1928 > , p. 36]. 5 [r3a,2] 



Again, in 1871, in his strategy for the defense of Paris, Blanqui comes back to the 
uselessness of the forts which Louis Philippe erected against Paris. [r3a,3] 

The postrevolutionary tendencies of architecture, which gain currency with Le- 
doux, are characterized by distinct block-like structures to which staircases and 
pedestals are often appended in "standardized" fashion. One might discern in 
this style a reflection of Napoleonic militaiy strategy. With this goes the effort to 
generate certain effects by means of structural massing. According to Kaufmann, 
"Revolutionary architecture aimed to produce an impression through giant 
masses, the sheer weight of the forms (hence the preference for Egyptian forms, 
which predates the Napoleonic campaign), and also through the handling of 
materials. The Cyclopean embossment of the saltworks, the powerful ordon- 
nance of the Palais de Justice at Aix, and the extreme severity of the prison 
designed for this city . . . speak clearly of that aim." Emil Kaufmann, Von Ledoux 
bu Le Corbusier (Vienna and Leipzig, 1933), p. 29. [r4,l] 

Ledoux's planned toll-helt for Paris: "From the beginning, he set his sights as high 
as possible. His tollgates were intended to proclaim from afar the glory of the 
capital. Of the more than forty guardhouses, not one resemhled any of the others, 
and among his papers after his death were found a number of unfinished plans for 
expanding the system." Emil Kaufmann, Von Ledoux bis Le Corbusier: Ur sprung 
und Entivicklung der autonomen Architektur (Vienna and Leipzig, 1933) , p. 27. 

[r4,2] 

"Shortly after 1800, things were already so far along that the ideas which appear 
in Ledoux and Boullee — elemental outbursts of passionate natures — were heing 
propounded as official doctrine. . . . Only three decades separate the late work of 
Blondel, which still . . . embodies the teachings of French classicism, from the 
Precis des leqons d' architecture of Durand, whose thinking had a decisive 
influence during the Empire and in the period following. They are the three dec- 
ades of Ledoux's career. Durand, who announced the norm from his chair at the 
Ecole Royale Polytechnique in Paris, . . . diverges from Blondel on all essential 



points. His primer hegins . . . with violent attacks on two famous works of classic 
Baroque art. St. Peter's in Rome, along with its square, and the Paris Pantheon 
are invoked as counterexamples. . . . Whereas Blondel warns of 'monotonous 
planimetry' and would not he unmindful of the function of perspective, Durand 
sees in the elementary schemata of the plan the only correct solutions." Emil 
Kaufmann, Von Ledoux bis he Corbusier (Vienna and Leipzig, 1933), pp. 50-51. 

N,3] 

The institution of the Ponts et Chaussees <Civil Department of Bridges and High- 
ways) had the unique privilege of coining through the great Revolution nnc«n- 
tested. [r4a,l] 

The students of the Ecoli; Poly technique, according to Barthelemy: 

Glory to you, youths of banquets and darts! 
How we applauded in our poets' hearts 
When on the dusty street you took your stand, 
Elegantly dressed, with rifle in hand! 



Barthelemy and Mery, L 'Insurrection (Paris, 1830), p. 20. 



[r4a,2] 