[Arcades, Magasins de Nouveautes, Sales Clerks] 



The magic columns of these palaces 
Show to the amateur on all sides, 
In the objects their porticos display, 
That industry is the rival of the arts. 

— "Chanson nouvelle" cited in Nouveaux Tableaux de Paris, ou Observa- 
tions sur les moeurs et usages des Parisiens au commencement du XIX 
sikle (Paiis, 1828), vol. 1, p. 27 

For sale the bodies, the voices, the tremendous unquestionable 
wealth, what will never be sold. 

— Rimbaud 1 



"In speaking of the inner boulevards," says the Illustrated Guide to Paris, a com- 
plete picture of the city on the Seine and its environs from the year 1852, "we 
have made mention again and again of the arcades which open onto them. These 
arcades, a recent invention of industrial luxury, are glass-roofed, marble-paneled 
corridors extending through whole blocks of buildings, whose owners have 
joined together for such enterprises. Lining both sides of these corridors, which 
get their light from above, are the most elegant shops, so that the arcade is a city, 
a world in miniature □ Flaneur D, in which customers will find everything they 
need. During sudden rainshowers, the arcades are a place of refuge for the 
unprepared, to whom they offer a secure, if restricted, promenade — one from 
which the merchants also benefit." 0 Wfeather □ 

This passage is the locus classicus for the presentation of the arcades; for not 
only do the divagations on the flaneur and the weather develop out of it, but, 
also, what there is to be said about the construction of the arcades, in an eco- 
nomic and architectural vein, would have a place here. [Al , 1] 

Names of mmgmsins de nouveautes: La FiJle d'Honneur, La Vestale, Le Page Incon- 
stant, Le Masque de Fer <The Iron Mask> , Le Petit Chaperon Rouge <Little Red 
Riding Hood>, Petite Nanette, La Chaumiere allemande <The German Cottage), 
Au Mamelouk, Le Coin de la Rue <On the Streetcorner> — names that mostly come 
from successful vaudevilles. □ Mythology DA glover: Au Ci-Devant Jeune Homme. 
A confectioner: Aux Armes de Werther. 



"The name of the jeweler stands over the shop door in large inlaid letters — inlaid 
with fine imitation gems." Eduard Kroloff, Schilderungen mus Pmris (Hamburg, 
1839), vol. 2, p. 73. "In the Galerie Vero-Dodat, there is a grocery store; above its 
door, one reads the inscription: 'Gastronomie Cosmopolite.' The individual char- 
acters of the sign are formed, in comic fashion, from snipes, pheasants, hares, 
antlers, lohsters, fish, bird kidneys, and so forth." Kroloff, Schilderungen mus 
Paris, vol. 2, p. 75. 0 Grandville D [Al,2] 

As business increased, the proprietor would purchase stock for a week and, to 
make room for the goods being stored, would withdraw to the entresol. In this 
way, the boutique became a magasin. [Al,3] 

It was the time in which Balzac could write: "The great poem of display chants its 
stanzas of color from the Church of the Madeleine to the Porte Saint-Denis." Le 
Diable a Paris (Paris, 1846), vol. 2, p. 91 (Balzac, "Les Boulevards de Paris"). 

[Al,4] 

"The day the word specialty was discovered by Her Majesty Industry, queen of 
France and of neighboring regions: on that day, it is said, Mercury, speciml god of 
merchants and of several other social specialties, knocked three times with his 
caduceus on the front of the Stock Exchange and swore by the beard of Proserpine 
that the word was fine with him." □ Mythology □ The word is used initially, how- 
ever, only for luxury items. Lm Grande Ville: Nouvemu Tmblemu de Pmris (Paris, 
1844), vol. 2, p. 57 (Marc Fournier, "Les Specialities parisiennes"). [Al,5] 

"The narrow streets surrounding the Opera and the hazards to which pedestrians 
were exposed on emerging from this theater, which is always besieged by carriages, 
gave a group of speculators in 1821 the idea of using some of the structures sepa- 
rating the new theater from the boulevard. / This enterprise, a source of riches for 
its originators, was at the same time of great benefit to the public. / By way of a 
small, narrow covered arcade built of wood, one had, in fact, direct access, with 
all the security of the Opera's vestibule, to these galleries, and from there to the 
boulevard. . . . Above the entablature of Doric pilasters dividing the shops rise 
two floors of apartments, and above the apartments — running the length of the 
galleries — reigns an enormous glass-paned roof." J. A. Dulaure, Histoire phy- 
sique, civile et morale de Pmris depuis 1821 jusqu'a nos jours (Paris, 1835), vol. 2, 
pp. 28-29. [Al,6] 

Until 1870, the carriage ruled the streets. On the narrow sidewalks the pedestrian 
was extremely cramped, and so strolling took place principally in the arcades, 
which offered protection from bad weather and from the traffic. "Our larger 
streets and our wider sidewalks are suited to the sweet flanerie that for our fathers 
was impossible except in the arcades." □ Flaneur D Edmond Beaurepaire, Pmris 
d'hier et d'mujourd'hui: Lm Chronique des rues (Paris, 1900), p. 67. [Ala.l] 



Names of arcades: Passage des Panoramas, Passage Vero-Dodat, Passage du Desir os 
(leading in earlier days to a house of ill repute), Passage Colbert, Passage Vivi- 

enne, Passage du Pont-Neuf, Passage du Caire, Passage de la Reunion, Passage de ^ 
1' Opera, Passage de la Trinite, Passage du Cheval-Blanc, Passage Pressiere <Bes- 

sieres?>, Passage du Bois de Boulogne, Passage Grosse-Tete. (The Passage des (L 

Panoramas was known at first as the Passage Mires.) [Ala, 2] - 

I 

The Passage Vero-Dodat (huilt between the Rue de Bouloy and the Rue Grenelle- g' 
Saint-Honore) "owes its name to two rich pork butchers, Messieurs Vero and 
Dodat, who in 1823 undertook its construction together with that of the adjacent 
buildings — an immense development. This led someone at the time to descrihe this S; 
arcade as a 'lovely work of art framed by two neighborhoods.'" J. A. Dulaure, 
Histoire physique, civile et morale de Paris depuis 1821 jusqu'k nos jours (Paris, ^ 
1835), vol. 2, p. 34. [Ala,3] & 

9 

The Passage Vero-Dodat had marble flooring. The actress Rachel lived there for a G 
while. [Ala,4] 



No. 26, Galerie Colbert: "There, in the guise of a female glover, shone a beauty 
that was approachable but that, in the matter of youth, attached importance 
only to its own; she required her favorites to supply her with the finery from 
which she hoped to make a fortune. . . . This young and beautiful woman under 
glass was called 'the Absolute'; but philosophy would have wasted its time pursu- 
ing her. Her maid was the one who sold the gloves; she wanted it that way." □ Dolls 
□ Prostitutes D <Charles> Lefeuve, Les Anciennes Maisons de Pmris, vol. 4. <Paris, 
1875>,p. 70. [Ala,5] 



Cour du Commerce: "Here (using sheep) the first experiments were conducted 
with the guillotine; its inventor lived at that time on the Cour du Commerce and 
the Rue de 1' Ancienne-Comedie." Lefeuve, Les Anciennes Mmisons de Pmris, vol. 
4, p. 148. [Ala,6] 



"The Passage du Caire, 2 where the main business is lithographic printing, must 
have decked itself out in lights when Napoleon III abolished the stamp duty on 
commercial circulars; this emancipation made the arcade rich, and it showed its 
appreciation with expenditures for beautification. Up to that point, when it 
rained, umbrellas had been needed in its galleries, which in several places lacked 
glass covering." Lefeuve, Les Anciennes Maisons de Paris, vol. 2, p. 233. D Dream 
Houses D Weather D (Egyptian ornamentation). [Ala, 7] 



Impasse Maubert, formerly d'Amhoise. Around 1756, at Nos. 4-6, a poisoner 
resided with her two assistants. All three were found dead one morning — killed 
through inhalation of toxic fumes. [Ala, 8] 



Shops in the Passage Vero-Dodat. Courtesy of the Musee Camavalet, Paris. Photo copyright 
© Phototheque des Musees de la Ville de Paris. See Ala,4. 

Years of reckless financial speculation under Louis XVIII. With the dramatic 
signage of the magasins de nouveautes, art enters the service of the businessman. 

[Ala,9] 

"After the Passage de Panoramas, which went hack to the year 1800 and which 
had an established reputation in society, there was, by way of example, the gallery 
that was opened in 1826 hy the butchers Vero and Dodat and that was pictured in 
the 1832 lithograph hy Arnout. After 1800 we must go all the way to 1822 to meet 
with a new arcade: it is between this date and 1834 that the majority of these 
singular passageways are constructed. The most important of them are grouped in 




Glass roof and iron girders, Passage Vivienne. Photographer unknown. Collection of 
Johann Friedrich Geist; courtesy Prestel Verlag, Munich. See Ala, 2. 




The Passage des Panoramas. Watercolor by an unknown artist, ca. 1810. Courtesy of 
Agence Giraudon. See A2,l. 



an area bounded by the Rue Croix-des-Petits-Champs to the south, the Rue de la 
Grange-Bateliere to the north, the Boulevard de Sebastopol to the east, and the 
Rue Ventadour to the west." Marcel Poete, Une vie de cite (Paris, 1925), pp. 373- 
374. [Ala,10] 

Shops in the Passage des Panoramas: Restaurant Veron, reading room, music 
shop, Marquis, wine merchants, hosier, haberdashers, tailors, bootmakers, ho- 
siers, bookshops, caricaturist, Theatre des Varietes. Compared with this, the Pas- 
sage Vivienne was the "solid" arcade. There, one found no luxury shops. D Dream 
Houses: arcade as nave with side chapels. □ [A2,l] 

People associated the "genius of the Jacobins with the genius of the industrials," 
but they also attributed to Louis Philippe the saying: "God be praised, and my 
shops too." The arcades as temples of commodity capital. [A2,2] 

The newest Paris arcade, on the Champs-Elysees, built by an American pearl 
king; no longer in business. D Decline D [A2,3] 

"Toward the end of the ancien regime, there were attempts to establish bazaar-like 
shops and fixed-price stores in Paris. Some large mmgmsins de nouvemutes — such 
as Le Diable Boiteux, Les Deux Magots, Le Petit Matelot, Pygmalion — were 
founded during the Restoration and during the reign of Louis Philippe; hut these 
were businesses of an inferior sort compared to today's establishments. The era of 
the department stores dates, in fact, only from the Second Empire. They have 
undergone a great deal of development since 1870, and they continue to develop." 
E<mile> Levasseur, Histoire du commerce de lm Frmnce, vol. 2 (Paris, 1912), 
p. 449. [A2,4] 

Arcades as origin of department stores? Which of the magasins named above 
were located in arcades? [A2,5] 

The regime of specialties furnishes also — this said in passing — the historical-mate- 
rialist key to the flourishing (if not the inception) of genre painting in the Forties 
of the previous century. With the growing interest of the bourgeoisie in matters 
of art, this type of painting diversified; but in conformity with the meager artistic 
appreciation initially displayed by this class, it did so in terms of the content, in 
terms of the objects represented. There appeared historical scenes, animal stud- 
ies, scenes of childhood, scenes from the life of monks, the life of the family, the 
life of the village — all as sharply defined genres. D Photography D [A2,6] 

The influence of commercial affairs on Lautreamont and Rimbaud should be 
looked into! [A2,7] 



"Another characteristic deriving chiefly from the Directory [presumably until 
around 1830??] would be the lightness of fabrics; on even the coldest days, one was 



seen only rarely in furs or warm overcoats. At the risk of losing their skin, women 
clothed themselves as though the harshness of winter no longer existed, as though 
nature had suddenly been transformed into an eternal paradise." <John> Grand- 
Carteret, Les Elegances de Im toilette (Paris), p. xxxiv. [A2,8] 

In other respects as well, the theater in those days provided the vocabulary for 
articles of fashion. Hats a la Tarare, a la Theodore, a la Figaro, a la Grande- 
Pretresse, a la Iphigenie, a la Calprenade, a la Victoire. The same niauerie that 
seeks in ballet the origin of the real betrays itself when — around 1830 — a news- 
paper takes the name Le Sylphe. 0 Fashion D [A2,9] 

Alexandre Dumas at a dinner party given by Princess Mathilde. The verse is 
aimed at Napoleon III. 

In their imperial splendor, 
The uncle and nephew are equal: 
The uncle seized the capitals, 
The nephew seizes our capital. 

Icy silence followed. Reported in Memoires du comte Hormce de Viel-Cmstel sur le 
regne de Napoleon III, vol. 2 (Paris, 1883), p. 185. [A2.10] 

"The coulisse* guaranteed the ongoing life of the Stock Exchange. Here there was 
never closing time; there was almost never night. When the Cafe Tortoni finally 
closed its doors, the column of stock jobbers would head across the adjacent 
boulevards and meander up and down there, collecting in front of the Passage de 
rOpera." Julius Rodenberg, Pmris bei Sonnenschein and Lmmpenlicht (Leipzig, 
1867), p. 97. [A2.ll] 

Speculation in railroad stocks under Louis Philippe. [A2,12] 

"Of the same extraction, furthermore [that is, from the house of Rothschild], is 
the amazingly eloquent Mires, who needs only to speak in order to convince his 
creditors that losses are profits — but whose name, after the scandalous trial 
against him, was nonetheless obliterated from the Passage Mires, which thereupon 
became the Passage des Princes (with the famous dining rooms of Peters restau- 
rant)." Rodenberg, Pmris bei Sonnenschein and Lmmpenlicht (Leipzig, 1867), 
p. 98. [A2a,l] 

Cry of the vendors of stock-exchange lists on the street: In the event of a rise in 
prices, "Rise in the stock market!" In the event of a fall, "Variations in the stock 
market!" The term "fall" was forbidden by the police. [A2,a,2] 



In its importance for the affairs of the coulisse, the Passage de FOpera is compara- 
ble to the Kranzlerecke. Speculator's argot "in the period preceding the outbreak 
of the German war [of 1866]: the 3-percent interest was called Alphonsine; the 



land credit, le gros Ernest; the Italian revenue, le pauvre Victor; the credit for 
movables, I e petit Jules.'" In Rodenberg <Leipzig, 1867>, p. 100. [A2a,3] 



Range of a stockbroker's fee: between 2 ,000,000 <sic> an d 1 ,400,000 francs. 

[A2a,4] 

"The arcades, nearly all of which date from the Restoration." Theodore Muret, 
L'Histoire pmr le thei.tr e (Paris, 1865), vol. 2, p. 300. [A2a,5] 

Some details concerning Avmnt, pendant, et mpres <Before, During, and After), by 
Scribe and Rougemont. Premier on June 28, 1828. The first part of the trilogy 
represents the society of the ancien regime, the second part depicts the Reign of 
Terror, and the third takes place in the society of the Restoration period. The 
main character, the General, has in peacetime become an industrialist and indeed 
a great manufacturer. "Here manufacturing replaces, at the highest level, the field 
worked by the soldier-laborer. The praises of industry, no less than the praises of 
warriors and Imuremtes, were sung by Restoration vaudeville. The bourgeois class, 
with its various levels, was placed opposite the class of nobles: the fortune ac- 
quired by work was opposed to ancient heraldry, to the turrets of the old manor 
house. This Third Estate, having become the dominant power, received in turn its 
flatterers." Theodore Muret, L'Histoire pmr le theatre, vol. 2, p. 306. [A2a,6] 

The Galeries de Bois, "which disappeared in 1828-1829 to make room for the 
Galerie d' Orleans, were made up of a triple line of shops that could hardly be 
called luxurious. There were two parallel lanes covered by canvas and planks, 
with a few glass panes to let the daylight in. Here one walked quite simply on the 
packed earth, which downpours sometimes transformed into mud. Yet people 
came from all over to crowd into this place, which was nothing short of mag- 
nificent, and stroll between the rows of shops that would seem like mere booths 
compared to those that have come after them. These shops were occupied chielly 
by two industries, each having its own appeal. There were, first, a great many 
milliners, who worked on large stools facing outward, without even a window to 
separate them; and their spirited expressions were, for many strollers, no small 
part of the place's attraction. And then the Galeries de Bois were the center of the 
new book trade." Theodore Muret, L'Histoire pmr le theatre, vol. 2, pp. 225-226. 

[A2a,7] 

Julius Rodenberg on the small reading room in the Passage de l'Opera: "What a 
cheerful air this small, half -darkened room has in my memory, with its high book- 
shelves, its green tables, its red-haired gmrqon (a great lover of books, who was 
always reading novels instead of bringing them to others), its German newspapers, 
which every morning gladdened the heart of the German abroad (all except the 
Cologne paper, which on average made an appearance only once in ten days). But 
when there is any news in Paris, it is here that one can receive it. Softly whispered 
(for the redhead keeps a sharp lookout to make sure that neither he nor other 



o 



readers will be disturbed by this), it passes from lips to ear, passes almost imper- 
ceptibly from pen to paper, and finally from writing desk to nearby letterbox. The 
good dmme du bureau has a friendly smile for all, and papers and envelopes for 
correspondents. The early mail is dispatched, Cologne and Augsburg have their 
news; and now — it is noontime! — to the tavern." Rodenberg, Pmris bei Sonnen- 
schein und Lmmpenlicht (Leipzig, 1867), pp. 6-7. [A2a,8] 

"The Passage du Caire is highly reminiscent, on a smaller scale, of the Passage du 
Saumon, which in the past existed on the Rue Montmartre, on the site of the 
present-day Rue Rachaumont." Paul Leautaud, "Vieux Paris," Mercure de 
France (October 15, 1927), p. 503. [A3,l] 

"Shops on the old model, devoted to trades found nowhere else, surmounted by a 
small, old-fashioned mezzanine with windows that each bear a number, on an 
escutcheon, corresponding to a particular shop. From time to time, a doorway 
giving onto a corridor; at the end of the corridor, a small stairway leading to these 
mezzanines. Near the knob of one of these doors, this handwritten sign: 



The worker next door 
would be obliged if, 
in closing the door, 
you refrained from slamming it. 

[A3 ,2] 

Another sign is cited in the same place (Leautaud, "Vieux Paris," Mercure de 
France [1927], pp. 502-503): 

ANGELA 
2nd floor, to the right 

[A3.3] 

Old name for department stores: docks a bon mmrche — that is, "discount docks." 
<Sigfried> Giedion, Bmuen in Frtmkreich <Leipzig and Rerlin, 1928>, p. 31. 

[A3,4] 

Evolution of the department store from the shop that was housed in arcades. 
Principle of the department store: "The floors form a single space. They can be 
taken in, so to speak, 'at a glance.'" Giedion, Bauen in Frankreich, p. 34. [A3,5] 

Giedion shows (in Bauen in Frankreich, p. 35) how the axiom, "Welcome the 
crowd and keep it seduced" [Science et I'industrie, 143 [1925], p. 6), leads to 
corrupt architectural practices in the construction of the department store Au 
Printemps (1881-1889). Function of commodity capital! [A3,6] 



"Even women, who were forbidden to enter the Stock Exchange, assembled at the £ 

door in order to glean some indications of market prices and to relay their orders -~ 

to brokers through the iron grating. " Lm Trmnsformmtion de Pmris sous le Second 'i* 

Empire (authors Poete, Clouzot, Henriot) (Paris, 1910>, on the occasion of the Jf" 

exhibition of the library and the historical works of the city of Paris, p. 66. £L 

[A3,7] ?■ 

I 

"We have no specialty" — this is what the well-known dealer in secondhand 8 

goods, Fremin, "the man with the head of gray," had written on the signboard ; 

advertising his wares in the Place des Abbesses. Here, in antique bric-a-brac, ^ 

reemerges the old physiognomy of trade that, in the first decades of the previous | 

century, began to be supplanted by the rule of the specialite. This "superior | 
scrap-yard" was called Au Philosophe by its proprietor. What a demonstration and 

demolition of stoicism! On his placard were the words: "Maidens, do not dally g£ 

under the leaves!" And: "Purchase nothing by moonlight." [A3,8] ^ 

nT 

Evidently people smoked in the arcades at a time when it was not yet customary to 
smoke in the street. "I must say a word here about life in the arcades, favored 
haunt of strollers and smokers, theater of operations for every kind of small 
business. In each arcade there is at least one cleaning establishment. In a salon 
that is as elegantly furnished as its intended use permits, gentlemen sit upon high 
stools and comfortably peruse a newspaper while someone busily brushes the dirt 
off their clothing and boots." Ferdinand von Gall, Paris und seine Smlons, vol. 2 
<01denburg, 1845>, pp. 22-23. [A3,9] 

A first winter garden — a glassed-in space with flower heds, espaliers, and foun- 
tains, in part underground — on the spot where, in the garden of the Palais-Royal 
in 1864. (and today as well?), the reservoir was located. Laid out in 1788. [A3, 10] 

"It is at the end of the Restoration that we see the first mmgmsins de nouvemutes: 
Les Vepres Siciliennes, Le Solitaire, La Fille Mai Gardee, Le Soldat Lahoureur, 
Les Deux Magots, Le Petit Saint-Thomas, Le Gagne-Denier (Penny Winnings>." 
<Lucien> Dubech and <Pierre> d'Espezel, Histoire de Pmris (Paris, 1926), p. 360. 

[A3, 11] 



"In 1820 . . . the Passage Viollet and the Passage des Deux Pavilions were opened. 
These arcades were among the novelties of their day. The result of private initia- 
tive, they were covered galleries housing shops that fashion made prosperous. The 
most famous was the Passage des Panoramas, which flourished from 1823 to 1831. 
'On Sundays,' observed Musset, one went en masse 'to the Panoramas or else to 
the boulevards.' It was also private initiative that created, somewhat hap- 
hazardly, the housing developments known as cites, the short streets or dead ends 
huilt at shared expense hy a syndicate of property owners." Lucien Dubech and 
Pierre d'Espezel, Histoire de Pmris (Paris, 1926), pp. 355-356. [A3a,l] 



In 1825, opening of the "Passages Dauphine, Saucede, Choiseul" and of the Cite 
Bergere. "In 1827 . . . the Passages Colbert, Crussol, de l'lndustrie. . . . 1828 saw 
the opening ... of the Passages Brady and des Gravilliers and the beginnings of 
the Galerie d' Orleans at the Palais-Royal, which replaced the wooden galleries 
that had burned down that year." Dubech and d'Espezel, Histoire de Pmris, 
pp. 357-358. [A3a,2] 

"The ancestor of the department stores, La Ville de Paris, appeared at 174 Rue 
Montmartre in 1843." Dubech and d'Espezel, Histoire de Paris, p. 389. [A3a,3] 

"Rainshowers annoy me, so I gave one the slip in an arcade. There are a great 
many of these glass-covered walkways, which often cross through the blocks of 
buildings and make several branchings, thus affording welcome shortcuts. Here 
and there they are constructed with great elegance, and in bad weather or after 
dark, when they are lit up bright as day, they offer promenades — and very popu- 
lar they are — past rows of glittering shops." Eduard Devrient, Briefe mus Pmris 
(Berlin, 1840), p. 34. [A3a,4] 

Rue-gmlerie. — "The street- gallery ... is the most important feature of a Phalan- 
stery and . . . cannot be conceived of in civilization. . . . Street-galleries . . . are 
heated in winter and ventilated in summer. . . . The street-gallery, or continuous 
peristyle, extends along the second story. . . . Those who have seen the gallery of 
the Louvre may take it as a model for the street-gallery in Harmony." E. Silber- 
ling, Dictionnmire de sociologie phmlmnsterienne (Paris, 1911), p. 386; citing 
<Charles> Fourier, Theorie de Vunite universelle (1822), p. 462, and he Nouvemu 
Monde industriel et societmire (1829), pp. 69, 125, 272. In addition: Gmlerie. — 
"All portions of the central edifice can he traversed by means of a wide gallery 
which runs along the second floor. . . . Thus, everything is linked by a series of 
passageways which are sheltered, elegant, and comfortable in winter thanks to the 
help of heaters and ventilators." E. Silberling, Dictionnmire, pp. 197-198; citing 
Fourier, Theorie mixte, ou speculmtive, et synthese routiniere de Vmssocimtion, 
p. 14. 1 [A3a,5] 

The Passage du Caire adjoining the former Cour des Miracles. Built in 1799 on the 
site of the old garden of the Convent of the Daughters of God. [A3a,6] 

Trade and traffic are the two components of the street. Now, in the arcades the 
second of these has effectively died out: the traffic there is rudimentary. The 
arcade is a street of lascivious commerce only; it is wholly adapted to arousing 
desires. Because in this street the juices slow to a standstill, the commodity 
proliferates along the margins and enters into fantastic combinations, like the 
tissue in tumors. — The flaneur sabotages the traffic. Moreover, he is no buyer. He 
is merchandise. [A3a,7] 



For the first time in history, with the establishment of department stores, consum- 
ers begin to consider themselves a mass. (Earlier it was only scarcity which 
taught them that.) Hence, the circus-like and theatrical element of commerce is 
quite extraordinarily heightened. [A4,l] 

With the appearance of mass-produced articles, the concept of specialty arises. Its 
relation to the concept of originality remains to be explored. [A4,2] 

"I grant that business at the Palais-Royal has had its day; but I believe that this 
should be attributed not to the absence of streetwalkers but to the erection of new 
arcades, and to the enlargement and refurbishing of several others. I will mention 
the Passages de l'Opera, du Grand-Cerf , du Saumon, de Vero-Dodat, Delorme, de 
Choiseul, anddes Panoramas." F. F. A. Beraud, Les Filles publiques de Pmris et Im 
police qui les regit (Paris and Leipzig, 1839), vol. 1, p. 205. [A4,3] 

"I do not know if business at the Palais-Royal has really suffered from the absence 
of femmes tie debmuche; but what is certain is that public decency there has im- 
proved enormously. ... It seems to me, furthermore, that respectable women now 
willingly do their shopping in the shops of the galleries . . . ; this has to be an 
advantage for the merchants. For when the Palais-Royal was invaded by a swarm 
of practically nude prostitutes, the gaze of the crowd was turned toward them, and 
the people who enjoyed this spectacle were never the ones who patronized the local 
businesses. Some were already ruined by their disorderly life, while others, yield- 
ing to the allure of libertinism, had no thought then of purchasing any goods, even 
necessities. I believe I can affirm . . . that, during those times of inordinate toler- 
ance, several shops at the Palais-Royal were closed, and in others huyers were 
rare. Thus, business did not at all prosper there, and it would be more accurate to 
say that the stagnation of business at that time was owing rather to the free circu- 
lation of the filles publiques than to their absence, which today has brought back 
into the galleries and the garden of this palace numerous strollers, who are far 
more favorable to business than prostitutes and libertines." F. F. A. Beraud, Les 
Filles publiques de Pmris (Paris and Leipzig, 1839), vol. 1, pp. 207-209. [A4,4] 

The cafes are filled 
With gourmets, with smokers; 
The theaters are packed 
With cheerful spectators. 
The arcades are swarming 
With gawkers, with enthusiasts, 
And pickpockets wriggle 
Behind the flaneurs. 



Ennery and Lemoine, Paris la nuit, cited in H. Gourdon de Genouillac, Les Re- 
frains de Im rue de 1830 a 1870 (Paris, 1879), pp. 46-47. — To be compared with 
Baudelaire's "Crepuscule du soir." [A4a,l] 



"And those who cannot pay for ... a shelter? They sleep wherever they find a 
place, in passages, arcades, in corners where the police and the owners leave them 
undisturbed." Friedrich Engels, Die Lage der mrbeitenden Masse in England, 



"In all the shops, like a uniform, the oak counter is adorned with counterfeit 
coins, in every kind of metal and in every format, mercilessly nailed in place like 
birds of prey on a door — unimpeachable evidence of the proprietor's scrupulous 
honesty." Nadar, Qiiand j'etuis photogrmphe (Paris <1900>), p. 294 ("1830 et envi- 



Fourier on the street-galleries: "To spend a winter's day in a Phalanstery, to visit 
all parts of it without exposure to the elements, to go to the theater and the opera 
in light clothes and colored shoes without worrying about the mud and the cold, 
would be a charm so novel that it alone would suffice to make our cities and castles 
seem detestable. If the Phalanstery were put to civilized uses, the mere conven- 
ience of its sheltered, heated, and ventilated passageways would make it enor- 
mously valuable. 6 Its property value . . . would be double that of another building 
its size." E. Poisson, Fourier [Anthology] (Paris, 1932), p. 144. [A4a,4] 

"The street-galleries are a mode of internal communication which would alone be 
sufficient to inspire disdain for the palaces and great cities of civilization. . . .The 
king of France is one of the leading monarchs of civilization; he does not even have 
a porch in his Tuileries palace. The king, the queen, the royal family, when they 
get into or out of their carriages, are forced to get as wet as any petty bourgeois 
who summons a cab before his shop. Doubtless the king will have on hand, in the 
event of rain, a good many footmen and courtiers to hold an umbrella for him . . . ; 
but he will still be lacking a porch or a roof that would shelter his party. . . . Let us 
describe the street-galleries which are one of the most charming and precious 
features of a Palace of Harmony. . . . The Phalanx has no outside streets or open 
roadways exposed to the elements. All portions of the central edifice can be tra- 
versed by means of a wide gallery which runs along the second floor of the whole 
building. At each extremity of this spacious corridor there are elevated passages, 
supported by columns, and also attractive underground passages which connect 
all the parts of the Phalanx and the adjoining buildings. Thus, everything is linked 
by a series of passageways which are sheltered, elegant, and comfortable in winter 
thanks to the help of heaters and ventilators. . . . The street-gallery, or continuous 
peristyle, extends along the second story. It could not be placed on the ground 
floor, since the lower part of the building will be traversed by carriage en- 
trances. . . . The street-galleries of a Phalanx wind along just one side of the cen- 
tral edifice and stretch to the end of each of its wings. All of these wings contain a 
double row of rooms. Thus, one row of rooms looks out upon the fields and gar- 
dens, and the other looks out upon the street-gallery. The street-gallery, then, will 
be three stories high with windows on one side. . . . The kitchens and some of the 



2nd ed. (Leipzig, 1848), p. 46 ("Die grossen Stadte"). 5 



[A4a,2] 



rons"). 



[A4 a ,3] 



public halls will be located on the ground floor. There will also be trap doors in the 

floors of the dining rooms on the second story. Thus, the tables may be set in the -- 

kitchens below and simply raised through the trap doors when it is time to eat. > 

These trap doors will be particularly useful during festivities, such as the visits of tf 

traveling caravans and legions, when there will be too many people to eat in the §^ 

ordinary dining rooms. Then double rows of tables will be set in the street-galler- - w 
ies, and the food will be passed up from the kitchen. / The principal puhlic halls 

should not be situated on the ground floor. There are two reasons for this. The first § 

r .... i' 

is that the patriarchs and children, who have difficulty climbing stairs, should be ^ 
lodged in the lower parts of the huilding. The second is that the children should be 

kept in isolation from the nonindustrial activities of the adults." Poisson, Fourier | 

[Anthology] (Paris, 1932), pp. 139-144. 7 [A5] 1 

Yes, pmrbleu! You know the power of Tibet. 

Implacable enemy of proud innocence, " 

Hardly does it appear than it carries away ^ 

The bookkeeper's wife and the burgher's daughter, £T 

The stern prude and the frigid coquette: 

It signals the victory of lovers; 

For fashion tolerates no resistance, 

And not to have it puts one to shame. 

Its fabric, braving the current bon mot, 

Softens in its folds the arrows of ridicule; 

Seeing it, you think of a magical talisman: 

It braces the spirits and subjugates the heart; 

For it to appear is already a triumph, its coming a conquest; 

It reigns as conqueror, as sovereign, as master; 

And treating its quiver as a burden quite useless, 

Love has fashioned its bandeau of cashmere. 

Edouard [d'Anglemont], Le Cmchemire, one-act comedy in verse, performed for 
the first time in Paris at the Theatre Royal de l'Odeon, on December 16, 1826 
(Paris, 1827), p. 30. [A5a,l] 

Delvau on Chodruc-Duclos: "Under the reign of Louis Philippe, who owed him 
nothing, he . . . did what he had done under the reign of Charles X, who in fact 
owed him something. . . . His bones took more time to rot than his name took to 
erase itself from the memory of men." Alfred Delvau, Les Lions du jour (Paris, 
1867), pp. 28-29. [A5a,2] 

"It was not until after the expedition to Egypt," when people in France gave 
thought to expanding the use of precious cashmere fabric, that a woman, Greek by 
birth, introduced it to Paris. M. Ternaux . . . conceived the admirable project of 
raising Hindustani goats in France. Since then, . . . there have been plenty of 
workers to train and trades to establish, in order for us to compete successfully 
against products renowned through so many centuries! Our manufacturers arc 



beginning to triumph . . . over women's prejudice against French shawls. . . . We 
have managed to make women forget for a moment the ridiculous fabric-designs of 
the Hindus by happily reproducing the vividness and brilliant harmony of the 
flowers found in our own gardens. There is a book in which all these interesting 
subjects are discussed both knowledgeably and elegantly. L'Histoire des schalls, 
by M. Rey, though written for the shawl manufacturers of Paris, is guaranteed to 
captivate women. . . . This book, together with its author's magnificent manufac- 
tured goods, will undoubtedly help to dissipate French people's infatuation with 
the work of foreigners. M. Rey, manufacturer of shawls made of wool, cashmere, 
etc. . . . has brought out several cashmeres ranging in price from 170 to 500 francs. 
We owe to him, among other improvements, . . . the graceful imitation of native- 
grown flowers in place of the bizarre palms of the Orient. Our praise would not he 
equal to the benefits he has bestowed, . . . nor could it render the high honor that 
this litterateur-manufacturer deserves for his long research and his talents. We 
must be content merely to name him." Chenoue and H. D., Notice sur Vexposition 
des produits de Uindustrie et des arts qui m lieu a Doumi en 1827 (Douai, 1827), 
pp. 24-25. [A6,l] 

After 1850: "It is during these years that the department stores are created: Au 
Bon Marche, Le Louvre, La Belle Jardiniere. Total sales for Au Bon Marche in 
1852 were only 450,000 francs; by 1869 they had risen to 21 million." Gisela 
Freund, La Photogrmphie du point de vue sociologique (manuscript, pp. 85-86); 
citing Lavisse, Histoire de France. [A6,2] 

"The printers . . . were able to appropriate, at the end of the eighteenth century, a 
vast area: . . . the Passage du Caire and its environs. . . . But with the extension of 
the boundaries of Paris, printers . . . were dispersed to all parts of the city. . . . 
Alas! A glut of printers! Today workers corrupted by the spirit of speculation 
ought to remember that . . . between the Rue Saint-Denis and the Cour des Mir- 
acles there still exists a long, smoke-filled gallery where their true household gods 
lie forgotten." Fdouard Foucaud, Paris inventeur (Paris, 1844), p. 154. [A6,3] 

Description of the Passage du Saumon, "which, hy way of three stone steps, 
opened onto the Rue Montorgueil. It was a narrow corridor decorated with pilas- 
ters supporting a ridged glass roof, which was littered with garbage thrown from 
neighboring houses. At the entrance, the signboard — a tin salmon indicating the 
main characteristic of the place: the air was filled with the smell of fish . . . and also 
the smell of garlic. It was here, above all, that those arriving in Paris from the 
south of France would arrange to meet. . . . Through the doors of the shops, one 
spied dusky alcoves where sometimes a piece of mahogany furniture, the classic 
furniture of the period, would manage to catch a ray of light. Further on, a small 
bar hazy with the smoke of tobacco pipes; a shop selling products from the colonies 
and emitting a curious fragrance of exotic plants, spices, and fruits; a ballroom 
open for dancing on Sundays and workday evenings; finally the reading room of 



A branch of La Belle Jardiniere in Marseilles. From Le Monde illustre, March 28, 1863. See A6,2. 



Sieur Ceccherini, who offered to patrons his newspapers and his books." J. Lucas- 
Dubreton, L'Affmire Alibmud, ou Louis-Philippe trmque (1836; rpt. Paris, 1927), 
pp. 114-115. [A6a,l] 

On the occasion of disturbances associated with the burial of General Lamarque 
on June 5, 1832, the Passage du Saumon was the scene of a battle waged on 
barricades, in which 200 workers confronted the troops. [A6a,2] 

"Martin: Business, you see, sir, ... is the ruler of the world! — Desgenmis: I am of 
your opinion, Monsieur Martin, but the ruler alone is not enough; there must be 
subjects. And that is where painting, sculpture, music come in. . . . — Martin: A 
little of that is necessary, surely, . . . and ... I myself have encouraged the arts. 
Why, in my last establishment, the Cafe de France, I had many paintings on 
allegorical subjects. . . . What is more, I engaged musicians for the evenings. . . . 
Finally, if I may invite you to accompany me . . . , you will see under my peristyle 
two very large, scantily attired statues, each with a light fixture on its head. — Des- 
genmis: A light fixture? — Mmrtin: That is my idea of sculpture: it must serve some 
purpose. . . . All those statues with an arm or a leg in the air — what are they good 



for, since they've had no pipe installed to carry gas? . . . What are they good for?" 
Theodore Barriere, Les Pmrisiens, produced at the Theatre du Vaudeville on De- 
cember 28, 1854 (Paris, 1855), p. 26. [Tbe play is set in 1839.] [A6a3] 



There was a Passage du Desir. <See Ala, 2. > [A6a,4] 

Chodruc-Duclos — a supernumerary at the Palais-Royal. He was a royalist, an 
opponent of the Vendee, and had grounds for complaining of ingratitude under 
Charles X. He protested by appearing publicly in rags and letting his beard grow. 

[A6a,5] 

Apropos of an engraving that pictures a shopfront in the Passage Vero-Dodat: 
"Onecannotpraisethis arrangement too highly — the purity of its lines; the pictur- 
esque and brilliant effect produced by tbe gaslight globes, which are placed be- 
tween the capitals of the two double columns bordering each shop; and finally the 
shop partitions, which are set off by reflecting plate glass." Cabinet des Estampes 
<in the Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris>. [A7,l] 

At No. 32 Passage Brady there was a dry-cleaning establishment, Maison Donnier. 
It was <famous> for its "giant workrooms" and its "numerous personnel." A con- 
temporary engraving shows the two-story building crowned by small mansards; 
female workers in great numbers are visible through the windows; from the ceil- 
ings bangs the linen. [A7,2] 

Engraving from the Empire: The Dmnce of the Shawl m.mong the Three Sultmnms. 
Cabinet des Estampes. [A7,3] 

Sketch and floor plan of the arcade at 36 Rue Hauteville, in black, blue, and pink, 
from the year 1856, on stamped paper. A hotel attached to the arcade is like- 
wise represented. In boldface: "Property for lease." Cabinet des Estampes. 

[A7.4] 

The first department stores appear to be modeled on oriental bazaars. From 
engravings one sees that, at least around 1880, it was the fashion to cover with 
tapestries the balustrades of the staircases leading to the atrium. For example, in 
the store called City of Saint-Denis. Cabinet des Estampes. [A7,5] 

"The Passage de l'Opera, with its two galleries, the Galerie de l'Horloge and the 
Galerie du Barometre. . . . The opening of the Opera on the Rue Le Peletier, in 
1821, brought this arcade into vogue, and in 1825 the duchesse de Berry came in 
person to inaugurate a 'Europama' in the Galerie du Barometre. . . . The grisettes 
of the Restoration danced in the Idalia Hall, built in the basement. Later, a cafe 
called the Divan de l'Opera was established in the arcade. . . . Also to be found in 
the Passage de l'Opera was the arms manufacturer Caron, the music publisher 



The Passage de l'Opera, 1822-1823, Courtesy of the Musee Camavalet, Paris. Photo copyright 
© Phototheque des Musees de !a Ville de Paris. See A7,6. 



Street scene in front of the Passage des Panoramas. Lithograph by Opitz, 1814. Courtesy of the 
Bibliotheque Nationale de France. See A7,Z 

Marguerie, the pastry chef Rollet, and finally the perfume shop of the Opera. . . . 
In addition, . . . there was Lemoimier, artiste en cheveux— which is to say, manu- 
facturer of handkerchiefs, reliquaries, and funeral items made of hair." Paul 
d'Ariste, La Vieet le monde du. boulevard, 1830-1879 (Paris <1930>), pp. 14-16. 

[A7,6] 



"The Passage des Panoramas, so named in memory of the two panoramas that 
stood on either side of its entranceway and that disappeared in 1831." Paul 
d'Ariste, L« Vie et le monde du boulevmrd (Paris), p. 14. [A7,7] 

The beautiful apotheosis of the "marvel of the Indian shawl," in the section on 
Indian art in Michelet's Bible de I'hummnite (Paris, 1864). [A7a,l] 

And Jehuda ben Halevy, 

In her view, would have been honored 

Quite enough by being kept in 

Any pretty box of cardboard 

With some very swanky Chinese 
Arabesques to decorate it, 
Like a bonbon box from Marquis 
In the Passage Panorama. 

Heinrich Heine, Hebrdische Melodien, "Jehuda ben Halevy," part 4, in Ro- 
mmnzero, book 3 (cited in a letter from Wiesengrund). 9 [A7a,2] 

Signboards. After the rebus style came a vogue for literary and military allusions. 
"If an eruption of the hilltop of Montmartre happened to swallow up Paris, as 
Vesuvius swallowed up Pompeii, one would be able to reconstruct from our sign- 
boards, after fifteen hundred years, the history of our military triumphs and of 
our literature." Victor Fournel, Ce qu'on voit dmns les rues de Paris (Paris, 1858), 
p. 286 ("Enseignes et affiches"). [A7a,3] 

Chaptal, in his speech on protecting brand names in industry: "Let us not 
assume that the consumer will be adept, when making a purchase, at distinguish- 
ing the degrees of quality of a material. No, gentlemen, the consumer cannot 
appreciate these degrees; he judges only according to his senses. Do the eye or 
the touch suffice to enable one to pronounce on the fastness of colors, or to 
determine with precision the degree of fineness of a material, the nature and 
quality of its manufacture?" <Jean-Antoine-Claude> Chaptal, Rapport au nom 
d 'une commission speciale char gee de I'examen du projet de loi relatif aux alterations et 
suppositions de noms sur les produits fthriques [Chambre des Pairs de France, ses- 
sion of July 17, 1824], p. 5. — The importance of good professional standing is 
magnified in proportion as consumer know-how becomes more specialized. 

[A7a,4] 

"What shall I say now of that coulisse which, not content with harboring a two- 
hour illegal session at the Stock Exchange, spawned once again not long ago, in the 
open air, two demonstrations per day on the Boulevard des Italiens, across from 
the Passage de l'Opera, where five or six hundred market speculators, forming a 
compact mass, followed clumsily in the wake of some forty unlicensed brokers, all 
the while speaking in low voices like conspirators, while police officers prodded 



them from behind to get them to move on, as one prods fat, tired sheep being led to 
the slaughterhouse." M. J. Ducos (de Gondrin), Comment on se mine a la Bourse 
(Paris, 1858), p. 19. [A7a,5] 



It was at 271 Rue Saint-Martin, in the Passage du Cheval Rouge, that Lacenaire 
committed his murders. [A7a,6] 

A sign: "L'epe-scie"<The Sawed-Off Epe[e]>. 10 [A7a,7] 

From a prospectus: "To the inhabitants of the Rues Beauregard, Bourbon- Ville- 
neuve, du Caire, and de la Cour des Miracles. ... A plan for two covered arcades 
running from the Place du Caire to the Rue Beauregard, ending directly in front of 
the Rue Sainte-Barbe, and linking the Rue Bourbon- Villeneuve with the Rue 
Hautcville. . . . Gentlemen, for some time now we have been concerned about the 
future of this neighborhood, and it pains us to see that properties so close to the 
boulevard carry a value so far below what they ought to have. This state of affairs 
would change if lines of communication were opened. Since it is impossible to 
construct new streets in this area, due to the great unevenness of the ground, and 
since the only workable plan is the one we have the honor of submitting to you 
here, we hope, Gentlemen, that in your capacity as owners . . . you will in turn 
honor us with your cooperation and affiliation. . . . Every partner will be required 
to pay an installment of 5 francs on each 250-franc share in the future company. 
As soon as a capital sum of 3,000 francs is realized, this provisional subscription 
will become fmal — said sum being judged at present sufficient. . . . Paris, this 20th 
of October, 1847." Printed prospectus inviting subscriptions. [A8,l] 

"In the Passage Choiseul, M. Comte, 'Physician to the King,' presents his cele- 
brated troupe of child actors extraordinaires in the interval between two magic 
shows in which he himself performs." J.-L. Croze, "Quelques spectacles de Paris 
pendant l'ete de 1835" (Le Temps, August 22, 1935). [A8,2] 

"At this turning point in history, the Parisian shopkeeper makes two discoveries 
that revolutionize the world of la nouveaute: the display of goods and the male 
employee. The display, which leads him to deck out his shop from floor to ceiling 
and to sacrifice three hundred yards of material to garland his facade like a flag- 
ship; and the male employee, who replaces the seduction of man by woman — 
something conceived by the shopkeepers of the ancien regime — with the seduction 
of woman by man, which is psychologically more astute. Together with these comes 
the fixed price, the known and nonnegotiable cost." H. Clouzot and R.-H. Valensi, 
Le Paris de "La Comedie humaine": Balzac et ses fournisseurs (Paris, 1926), 
pp. 31-32 ("Magasins de nouveautes"). [A8,3] 

When a magasin de nouveautes rented the space formerly occupied by Hetzel, the 
editor of La Comedie humaine, Balzac wrote: "T/ie Human Comedy has yielded to 



the comedy of cashijieres." (Clouzot and Valensi, Le Paris de "L« Comedie hu- 
muine," p. 37.) [A8,4] 



Passage du Commerce-Saint- Andre: a reading room. [ A8a,l] 

"Once the socialist government had become the legitimate owner of all the houses 
of Paris, it handed them over to the architects with the order ... to establish 
street- galleries . . . . The architects accomplished the mission entrusted to them as 
well as could be expected. On the second story of every house, they took all the 
rooms that faced the street and demolished the intervening partitions; they then 
opened up large bays in the dividing walls, thereby obtaining street-galleries that 
had the height and width of an ordinary room and that occupied the entire length 
of a block of buildings. In the newer qumrtiers, where neighboring houses have 
their floors at approximately the same height, the galleries could be joined to- 
gether on a fairly even level. . . . But on older streets . . . the floors had to be 
carefully raised or lowered, and often the builders had to resign themselves to 
giving the floor a rather steep slant, or breaking it up with stairs. When all the 
blocks of houses were thus traversed by galleries occupying . . . their second story, 
it remained only to connect these isolated sections to one another in order to 
constitute a network . . . embracing the whole city. This was easily done by erect- 
ing covered walkways across every street. . . . Walkways of the same sort, but 
much longer, were likewise put up over the various boulevards, over the squares, 
and over the bridges that cross the Seine, so that in the end ... a person could 
stroll through the entire city without ever being exposed to the elements .... As 
soon as the Parisians had got a taste of the new galleries, they lost all desire to set 
foot in the streets of old — which, they often said, were fit only for dogs." Tony 
Moilin, Pmris enl'mn 2000 (Paris, 1869), pp. 9-11. [A8a,2] 

"The second floor contains the street-galleries. . . . Along the length of the great 
avenues, . . . they form street-salons. . . . The other, much less spacious galleries 
are decorated more modestly. They have been reserved for retail businesses that 
here display their merchandise in such a way that passersby circulate no longer in 
front of the shops but in their interior." Tony Moilin, Pmris en Vmn 2000 (Paris, 
1869), pp. 15-16 ("Maisons-modeles"). [A8a,3] 

Sales clerks: "There are at least 20,000 in Paris. ... A great number of sales clerks 
have been educated in the classics . . . ; one even finds among them painters and 
architects unaffiliated with any workshop, who use a great deal of their knowledge 
... of these two branches of art in constructing displays, in determining the design 
of new items, in directing the creation of fashions." Pierre Larousse, Grmnd Dic- 
tionnmire universel du XIX" siecle, vol. 3 (Paris, 1867), p. 150 (article on "Cali- 
cot"). [A9,l] 

"Why did the author of Etudes de moeurs u <Studies of Manners) choose to pre- 
sent, in a work of fiction, lifelike portraits of the notables of his day? Doubtless for 



his own amusement first of all. . . . This explains the descriptions. For the direct 
citations, another reason must be found — and we see none better than his unmis- 
takable aim of providing publicity. Balzac is one of the first to have divined the 
power of the advertisement and, above all, the disguised advertisement. In those 
days, . . . the newspapers were unaware of such power. ... At the very most, 
around midnight, as workers were finishing up the layout, advertising writers 
might slip in at the bottom of a column some lines on Pate de Regnault or Brazilian 
Blend. The newspaper advertisement as such was unknown. More unknown still 
was a process as ingenious as citation in a novel. . . . The tradesmen named by 
Balzac . . . are clearly his own. . . . No one understood better than the author of 
Cesar Birotteau the unlimited potential of publicity. ... To confirm this, one need 
only look at the epithets ... he attaches to his manufacturers and their products. 
Shamelessly he dubs them: the renowned Victorine; Plaisir, an illustrious hair- 
dresser; Staub, the most celebrated tailor of his age; Gay, af mmous haberdasher 
... on the Rue de la Michodiere (even giving the address!); . . . 'the cuisine of the 
Rocher de Cancale, . . . the premier restaurant in Paris . . . , which is to say, in the 
entire world.'''" H. Clouzot and R.-H. Valensi, Le Paris de "La Comedie hu- 
maine": Balzac et ses fournisseurs (Paris, 1926), pp. 7-9 and 177-179. [A9,2] 

The Passage Vero-Dodat connects the Rue Croix-des-Petits-Champs with the Rue 
Jean- Jacques-Rousseau. In the latter, around 1840, Cabet held his meetings in his 
rooms. We get an idea of the tone of these gatherings from Martin Nadaud's 
Memoir es de Leonard, anciengarqon maqon: "He was still holding in his hand the 
towel and razor he had just been using. He seemed filled with joy at seeing us 
respectably attired, with a serious air: 'Ah, Messieurs,' he said (he did not say 
'Citizens'), 'if your adversaries could only see you now! You would disarm their 
criticisms. Your dress and your bearing are those of well-bred men.'" Cited in 
Charles Benoist, "L'Hommede 1848," part 2, Revue des deux mondes (February 
1, 1914), pp. 641-642. — It was characteristic of Cabet to believe that workers 
need not busy themselves with writing. [A9,3] 

Street-salons: "The largest and most favorably situated among these [street- 
galleries] were tastefully decorated and sumptuously furnished. The walls and 
ceilings were covered with . . . rare marble, gilding, . . . mirrors, and paintings. 
The windows were adorned with splendid hangings and with curtains embroidered 
in marvelous patterns. Chairs, fauteuils, sofas . . . offered comfortable seating to 
tired strollers. Finally, there were artistically designed objects, antique cabi- 
nets, . . . glass cases full of curiosities, . . . porcelain vases containing fresh flow- 
ers, aquariums full of live fish, and aviaries inhabited by rare birds. These 
completed the decoration of the street-galleries, which lit up the evening with . . . 
gilt candelabras and crystal lamps. The government had wanted the streets be- 
longing to the people of Paris to surpass in magnificence the drawing rooms of the 
most powerful sovereigns. . . . First thing in the morning, the street-galleries are 
turned over to attendants who air them out, sweep them carefully, brush, dust, 
and polish the furniture, and everywhere impose the most scrupulous cleanliness. 
Then, depending on the season, the windows are either opened or closed, and 



either a fire is lit or the blinds are lowered. . . . Between nine and ten o'clock this 
cleaning is all completed, and passersby, until then few and far between, begin to 
appear in greater numbers. Entrance to the galleries is strictly forbidden to any- 
one who is dirty or to carriers of heavy loads; smoking and spitting are likewise 
prohibited here." Tony Moilin, Paris en I'mn 2000 (Paris, 1869), pp. 26-29 ("As- 
pect des rues-galeries"). [A9a,l] 

The mmgfLsins de nouvemutes owe their existence to the freedom of trade estab- 
lished by Napoleon I. "Of those establishments, famous in 1817, which gave them- 
selves names like La Fille Mai Gardee, Le Diable Boiteux, Le Masque de Fer, or 
Les Deux Magots, not one remains. Many of those which replaced them under 
Louis Philippe also foundered later on — like La Belle Fermiere and La Chaussee 
d'Antin. Or else they were sold at little profit — like Le Coin de Rue and Le Pauvre 
Diable." G. d'Avenel, "Le Mecanisme de la vie moderne," part 1: "Les Grands 
Magasins," Revue des deux mondes (July 15, 1894), p. 334. [A9a,2] 

The office of Philipon's weekly Lm Cmricttture was in the Passage Vero-Dodat. 

[A9a,3] 

Passage du Caire. Erected after Napoleon's return from Egypt. Contains some 
evocations of Egypt in the reliefs — sphinx-like heads over the entrance, among 
other things. "The arcades are sad, gloomy, and always intersecting in a manner 
disagreeable to the eye. . . . They seem . . . destined to house lithographers' stu- 
dios and binders' shops, as the adjoining street is destined for the manufacture of 
straw hats; pedestrians generally avoid them." Elie Berthet, "Rue et Passage du 
Caire," Pmris chez soi (Paris <1854>), p . 362. [ AlO,l] 

"In 1798 and 1799, the Egyptian campaign lent frightful importance to the fashion 
for shawls. Some generals in the expeditionary army, taking advantage of the 
proximity of India, sent home shawls ... of cashmere to their wives and lady 
friends. . . . From then on, the disease that might be called cashmere fever took on 
significant proportions. It began to spread during the Consulate, grew greater 
under the Empire, became gigantic during the Restoration, reached colossal size 
under the July Monarchy, and has finally assumed Sphinx-like dimensions since 
the February Revolution of 1848." Pmris chez soi (Paris), p. 139 (A. Durand, 
"Chales — Cachemires indiens et francais"). Contains an interview with M. Mar- 
tin, 39 Rue Richelieu, proprietor of a store called The Indians; reports that shawls 
which earlier were priced between 1,500 and 2,000 francs can now be bought for 
800 to 1,000 francs. [A10.2] 

From Brazier, Gabriel, and Dumersan, Les Pmssmges et les rues, vaudeville in one 
act, presented for the first time, in Paris, at the Theatre des Varietes on March 7, 
1827 (Paris, 1827). — Beginning of a song by the shareholder Dulingot: 



For the arcades, I form 
Continual refrains of thanks: 



In the Passage Delorme 

I've put a hundred thousand francs. (Pp. 5-6) 

"I hear they want to roof all the streets of Paris with glass. That will make for 
lovely hothouses; we will live in them like melons" (p. 19). [A10,3] 

From Girard, Des Tombemux, ou De I'Influence des institutions funebres sur les 
moeurs (Paris, 1801): "The new Passage du Caire, near the Rue Saint-Denis, . . . 
is paved in part with funerary stones, on which the Gothic inscriptions and the 
emblems have not yet been effaced." The author wishes to draw attention here to 
the decline of piety. Cited in Edouard Fournier, Chroniques et legendes des rues 
de Pmris (Paris, 1864), p. 154. [A10,4] 

Brazier, Gabriel, and Dumersan, Les Pmssm,ges et les rues, on L* Guerre declmree, 
vaudeville in one act, performed for the first time, in Paris, at the Theatre des 
Varietes on March 7, 1827 (Paris, 1827). — The party of arcades-adversaries is 
composed ofM. Duperron, umbrella merchant; Mme. Duhelder, wife of a carriage 
provider; M. Mouffetard, hatter; M. Blancmanteau, merchant and manufacturer 
of clogs; and Mme. Dubac, rentier — each one coming from a different part of 
town. M. Dulingot, who has bought stock in the arcades, has championed their 
canse. His lawyer is M. Pour; that of his opponents, M. Contre. In the second to 
last (fourteenth) scene, M. Contre appears at the head of a column of streets, 
which are decked with banners proclaiming their names. Among them are the Rue 
aux Ours, Rue Bergere, Rue du Croissant, Rue du Puits-qui-Parle, Rue du 
Grand-Hurleur. Likewise in the next scene — a procession of arcades with their 
banners: Passage du Saumon, Passage de I'Ancre, Passage du Grand-Cerf, Pas- 
sage du Pont-Neuf , Passage de I'Opera, Passage du Panorama <sic> . In the follow- 
ing scene, the last (sixteenth), Lutece 12 emerges from the bowels of the earth, at 
first in the guise of an old woman. In her presence, M. Contre takes up the defense 
of the streets against the arcades. "One hundred forty-four arcades open their 
mouths wide to devour our customers, to siphon off the ever-rising flow of our 
crowds, both active and idle. And you want us streets of Paris to ignore this clear 
infringement of our ancient rights! No, we demand . . . the interdiction of our one 
hundred forty-four opponents and, in addition, fifteen million, five hundred thou- 
sand francs in damages and interest" (p. 29). The argument by M. Pour in favor of 
the arcades takes the form of verse. An extract: 

We whom they would banish — we are more than useful. 
Have we not, by virtue of our cheerful aspect, 
Encouraged all of Paris in the fashion 
Of bazaars, those marts so famous in the East? 



And what are these walls the crowd admires? 
These ornaments, these columns above all? 
You'd think you were in Athens; and this temple 
Is erected to commerce by good taste. (Pp. 29-3#) 



Lutece arbitrates the differences: '"The affair is settled. Genies of light, hearken 
to my voice.' (At this moment the whole gallery is suddenly illuminated by gas- 
light.)" (p. 31). A ballet of streets and arcades concludes the vaudeville. [A10a,l] 

"I do not at all hesitate to write — as monstrous as this may seem to serious writers 
on art — that it was the sales clerk who launched lithography. . . . Condemned to 
imitations of Raphael, to Briseises by Regnault, it would perhaps have died; the 
sales clerk saved it." Henri Bouchot, La Lithographie (Paris <1895>), pp. 50-51. 

[A11.1] 

In the Passage Vivienne 

She told me: "I'm from Vienna." 

And she added: 

"I live with my uncle, 

The brother of Papa! 

I take care of his furuncle — 

It has its charms, this fate." 

I promised to meet the damsel again 

In the Passage Bonne-Nouvelle; 

But in the Passage Brady 

I waited in vain. 



And there you have it: arcade amours! 

Narcisse Lebeau, cited by Leon-Paul Fargue, "Cafes de Paris," part 2 [in Vu, 9, 
no. 416 (March 4, 1936)]. [A11.2] 

"There seems no reason, in particular, at the first and most literal glance, why the 
story should be called after the Old Curiosity Shop. Only two of the characters 
have anything to do with such a shop, and they leave it for ever in the first few 
pages .... But when we feel the situation with more fidelity we realize that this title 
is something in the nature of a key to the whole Dickens romance. His tales always 
started from some splendid hint in the streets. And shops, perhaps the most poeti- 
cal of all things, often set his fancy galloping. Every shop, in fact, was to him the 
door of romance. Among all the huge serial schemes . . . it is a matter of wonder 
that he never started an endless periodical called the The Street, and divided it 
into shops. He could have written an exquisite romance called The Baker's Shop; 
another called The Chemist's Shop; another called The Oil Shop, to keep company 
with The Old Curiosity S/iop." G. K. Chesterton, Dickens, trans. Laurent and 
Martin-Dupont (Paris, 1927), pp. 82-83. 13 [A11.3] 

"One may wonder to what extent Fourier himself believed in his fantasies. In his 
manuscripts he sometimes complains of critics who take literally what is meant as 
figurative, andwhoinsist moreover on speaking of his 'studied whims.' There may 
have been at least a modicum of deliberate charlatanism at work in all this — an 
attempt to launch his system hy means of the tactics of commercial advertising, 



which had begun to develop. "F. Armani and R. Maublanc, Fourier (Paris, 1937), 
vol. 1, p. 158. D Exhibitions D [Alla,l] 



Proudhon's confession near the end of his life (in his bookDe Im justice 1 ' 1 — com- 
pare with Fourier's vision of the phalanstery): "It has been necessary for me to 
become civilized. But need I approve? The little bit of civilizing I've received 
disgusts me. ... I hate houses of more than one story, houses in which, by contrast 
with the social hierarchy, the meek are raised on high while the great are settled 
near the ground." Cited in Armand Cuvillier, Marx et Proudhon: A Im. lumiere du 
Mmrxisme, vol. 2, part 1 (Paris, 1937), p. 211. [Alla,2] 

Blanqui: "'I wore,' he says, 'the first tricolored cockade of 1830, made by Ma- 
dame Bodin in the Passage du Commerce.'" Gustave Geffroy, L'Enferme (Paris, 
1897), p. 240. [Alla,3] 

Baudelaire can still write of "a book as dazzling as an Indian handkerchief or 
shawl." Baudelaire, L'Art rommntique (Paris), p. 192 ("Pierre Dupont"). 15 

[Alla,4] 

The Crauzat Collection possesses a beautiful reproduction of the Passage des 
Panoramas from 1808. Also found there: a prospectus for a bootblacking shop, in 
which it is a question mainly of Puss in Boots. [ Al la, 5] 

Baudelaire to his mother on December 25, 1861, concerning an attempt to pawn a 
shawl: "I was told that, with the approach of New Year's Day, there was a glut of 
cashmeres in the stores, and that they were trying to discourage the public from 
bringing any more in." Charles Baudelaire, Lettres a sm mere (Paris, 1932), 
p. 198. [Alla,6] 

"Our epoch will he the link between the age of isolated forces rich in original 
creativeness and that of the uniform but leveling force which gives monotony to its 
products, casting them in masses, and following out one unifying idea — the ulti- 
mate expression of social communities." H. de Balzac, L'lllustre Gmudissmrt, ed. 
Calmann-Levy (Paris, 1837), p. I. 16 [Alla,7] 

Sales at Au Bon Marche, in the years 1852 to 1863, rose from 450,000 to 
7 million francs. The rise in profits could have been considerably less. "High 
turnover and small profi ts" was at that time a new principle, one that accorded 
with the two dominant forces in operation: the multitude of purchasers and the 
mass of goods. In 1852, Boucicaut allied himself with Vidau, the proprietor of Au 
Bon Marche, the magasin de nouveaute's. "The originality consisted in selling 
guaranteed merchandise at discount prices. Items, fi rst of all, were marked with 
fixed prices, another bold innovation which did away with bargaining and with 
'process sales' — that is to say, with gauging the price of an article to the physiog- 
nomy of the buyer; then the 'return' was instituted, allowing the customer to 




Au Bon Marche department store in Paris. Woodcut, ca. 1880. See A12,l. 



cancel his purchase at will; and, finally, employees were paid almost entirely by 
commission on sales. These were the constitutive elements of the new organiza- 
tion." George d'Avenel, "Le Mecanisme de la vie moderne: Les Grands Maga- 
sins," Revue des deux mundes, 124 (Paris, 1894), pp. 335-336. [A12,l] 

The gain in time realized for the retail business by the abolition of bargaining 
may have played a role initially in the calculations of department stores. [ A12,2] 

A chapter, "Shawls, Caslnneres," in Borne's Industrie- Ausstellung im Louvre 
< Exhibition of Industry in the Louvre >. Ludwig Borne, Gesammelte Schriften 
(Hamburg and Frankfurt am Main, 1862), vol. 3, p. 260. [A12,3] 

The physiognomy of the arcade emerges with Baudelaire in a sentence at the 
beginning of "Le Joueur genereux": "It seemed to me odd that I could have passed 
this enchanting haunt so often without suspecting that here was the entrance." 
<Baudelaire, Oeuvres, ed. Y.-G. LeDantec (Paris, 1931),> vol. 1, p. 456." [A12,4] 

Specifics of the department store: the customers perceive themselves as a mass; 
they are confronted with an assortment of goods; they take in all the floors at a 
glance; they pay fixed prices; they can make exchanges. [A12,5] 

"In those parts of the city where the theaters and public walks . . . are located, 
where therefore the majority of foreigners live and wander, there is hardly a 
building without a shop. It takes only a minute, only a step, for the forces of 
attraction to gather; a minute later, a step further on, and the passerby is standing 
before a different shop. . . . One's attention is spirited away as though by violence, 
and one has no choice but to stand there and remain looking up until it returns. 
The name of the shopkeeper, the name of his merchandise, inscribed a dozen times 
on placards that hang on the doors and above the windows, beckon from all sides; 
the exterior of the archway resembles the exercise book of a schoolboy who writes 
the few words of a paradigm over and over. Fabrics are not laid out in samples but 
are hung before door and window in completely unrolled bolts. Often they are 
attached high up on the third story and reach down in sundry folds all the way to 
the pavement. The shoemaker has painted different-colored shoes, ranged in rows 
like battalions, across the entire facade of his building. The sign for the locksmiths 
is a six-foot-high gold-plated key; the giant gates of heaven could require no larger. 
On the hosiers' shops are painted white stockings four yards high, and they will 
startle you in the dark when they loom like ghosts. . . . But foot and eye are 
arrested in a nobler and more charming fashion by the paintings displayed before 
many storefronts. . . . These paintings are, not infrequently, true works of art, 
and if they were to hang in the Louvre, they would inspire in connoisseurs at least 
pleasure if not admiration. . . . The shop of a wigmaker is adorned with a picture 
that, to be sure, is poorly executed but distinguished by an amusing conception. 
Crown Prince Absalom hangs by his hair from a tree and is pierced by the lance of 
an enemy. Underneath runs the verse: 'Here you see Absalom in his hopes quite 



debunked, / Had he worn a peruke, he'd not be defunct.' Another . . . picture, 
representing a village maiden as she kneels to receive a garland of roses — token of 
her virtue — from the hands of a chevalier, ornaments the door of a milliner's 
shop." Ludwig Borne, Schilderungen *us Pmris (1822 und 1823), ch. 6 ("Die 
Laden" <Shops>), in Gesmmmelte Schriften (Hamburg and Frankfurt am Main, 
1862), vol. 3, pp. 46-49. [A12a] 



On Baudelaire's "religious intoxication of great cities":" 5 the department stores 
are temples consecrated to this intoxication. [A13]