[Fashion] 



Fashion: Madam Death! Madam Death! 

— Giacomo Leopardi, "Dialogue between Fashion and Death" 1 

Nothing dies; all is transformed. 

— Honore de Balzac, Rnsees, sujets, fragments (Paris, 1910), p. 46 



And boredom is the grating before which the courtesan teases death. 
□ Ennui D [Bl,l] 

Similarity of the arcades to the indoor arenas in which one learned to ride a 
bicycle. In these halls the figure of the woman assumed its most seductive aspect: 
as cyclist. That is how she appears on contemporary posters. Cheret the painter 
of this feminine pulchritude. The costume of the cyclist, as an early and uncon- 
scious prefiguration of sportswear, corresponds to the dream prototypes that, a 
litde before or a little later, are at work in the factory or the automobile. Just as 
the first factory buildings cling to the traditional form of the residential dwelling, 
and just as the first automobile chassis imitate carriages, so in the clothing of the 
cyclist the sporting expression still wresdes with the inherited pattern of elegance, 
and the fruit of this struggle is the grim sadistic touch which made this ideal 
image of elegance so incomparably provocative to the male world in those days. 
D Dream Houses D [Bl,2] 

"In these years [around 1880], not only Joes the Renaissance fashion begin to do 
mischief, but on the other side a new interest in sports — above all, in equestrian 
sports — arises among women, and together these two tendencies exert an influence 
on fashion from quite different directions. The attempt to reconcile these senti- 
ments dividing the female soul yields results that, in the years 1882-1885, are 
original if not always beautiful. To improve matters, dress designers simplify and 
take in the waist as much as possible, while allowing the skirt an amplitude all the 
more rococo." 70 Jmhre deutsche Mode (1925), pp. 84-87. [Bl,3] 

Here fashion has opened the business of dialectical exchange between woman 
and ware — between carnal pleasure and the corpse. The clerk, death, tall and 



loutish, measures the century by the yard, serves as mannequin himself to save 
costs, and manages single-handedly the liquidation that in French is called revolu- 
tion. For fashion was never anything other than the parody of the motley cadaver, 
provocation of death through the woman, and bitter colloquy with decay whis- 
pered between shrill bursts of mechanical laughter. That is fashion. And that is 
why she changes so quickly; she titillates death and is already something differ- 
ent, something new, as he casts about to crush her. For a hundred years she holds 
her own against him. Now, finally, she is on the point of quitting the field. But he 
erects on the banks of a new Lethe, which rolls its asphalt stream through 
arcades, the armature of the whores as a battle memorial. □ Revolution □ Love D 

[B1.4] 

Squares, o square in Paris, infinite showplace, 

where the modiste Madame Lamort 

winds and binds the restless ways of the world, 

those endless ribbons, to ever-new 

creations of bow, frill, flower, cockade, and fruit — 

R. M. Rilke, Duineser Elegien (Leipzig, 1923), p. 23. 2 [Bl,5] 

"Nothing has a place of its own, save fashion appoints that place." L'Esprit d'Al- 
phon.se Kmrr: <Pensees extrmites de ses oeuvres completes) (Paris, 1877), p. 129. 
"If a woman of taste, while undressing at night, should find herself constituted in 
reality as she has pretended to be during the day, I like to think she'd be discov- 
ered next morning drowned in her own tears." Alphonse Karr, cited in F. Th. 
Vischer, Mode und Zynismus (Stuttgart, 1879), pp. 106-107. [Bl,6] 

With Karr, there appears a rationalist theory of fashion that is closely related to 
the rationalist theory of the origin of religions. The motive for instituting long 
skirts, for example, he conceives to be the interest certain women would have 
had in concealing an unlovely <foot>. Or he denounces, as the origin of certain 
types of hats and certain hairstyles, the wish to compensate f or thin hair. [B 1 , 7] 

Who still knows, nowadays, where it was that in the last decade of the previous 
century women would offer to men their most seductive aspect, the most inti- 
mate promise of their figure? In the asphalted indoor arenas where people 
learned to ride bicycles. The woman as cyclist competes with the cabaret singer 
for the place of honor on posters, and gives to fashion its most daring line. 

[Bl,8] 

For the philosopher, the most interesting thing about fashion is its extraordinary 
anticipations. It is well known that art will often — for example, in pictures — pre- 
cede the perceptible reality by years. It was possible to see streets or rooms that 
shone in all sorts of fiery colors long before technology, by means of illuminated 
signs and other arrangements, actually set them under such a light. Moreover, 
the sensitivity of the individual artist to what is coming certainly far exceeds that 



of the grande dame. Yet fashion is in much steadier, much more precise contact 
with the coming thing, thanks to the incomparable nose which the feminine 
collective has for what lies waiting in the future. Each season brings, in its newest 
creations, various secret signals of things to come. Whoever understands how to 
read these semaphores would know in advance not only about new currents in 
the arts but also about new legal codes, wars, and revolutions. 3 — Here, surely, 
lies the greatest charm of fashion, but also the difficulty of making the charming 
fruitful. [BlaJ] 

"Whether you translate Russian fairy tales, Swedish family sagas, or English 
picaresque novels — you will always come back in the end, when it is a question of 
setting the tone for the masses, to France, not because it is always the truth but 
because it will always be the fashion." <Karl> Gutzkow, Briefe aus Paris, vol. 2 
<Leipzig, 1842>, pp. 227-228. Each time, what sets the tone is without doubt the 
newest, but only where it emerges in the medium of the oldest, the longest past, 
the most ingrained. This spectacle, the unique self -construction of the newest in 
the medium of what has been, makes for the true dialectical theater of fashion. 
Only as such, as the grandiose representation of this dialectic, can one appreciate 
the singular books of Grandville, which created a sensation toward the middle of 
the century. When Grandville presents a new fan as the "fan of Iris" and his 
drawing suggests a rainbow, or when the Milky Way appears as an avenue 
illuminated at night by gaslamps, or when "the moon (a self-portrait)" reposes on 
fashionable velvet cushions instead of on clouds* — at such moments we first 
come to see that it is precisely in this century, the most parched and imagination- 
starved, that the collective dream energy of a society has taken refuge with 
redoubled vehemence in the mute impenetrable nehula of fashion, where the 
understanding carmot follow. Fashion is the predecessor — no, the eternal dep- 
uty — of Surrealism. [Bla,2] 

A pair of lascivious engravings by Charles Vernier entitled A Wedding on Wheels — 
showing the departure and the return. The bicycle offered unsuspected possibili- 
ties for the depiction of the raised skirt. [Bla,3] 

A definitive perspective on fashion follows solely from the consideration that to 
each generation the one immediately preceding it seems the most radical anti- 
aphrodisiac imaginable. In this judgment it is not so far wrong as might be 
supposed. Every fashion is to some extent a bitter satire on love; all sexual 
perversities are suggested in every fashion by the most ruthless means; every 
fashion is filled with secret resistances to love. It is worthwhile reflecting on the 
following observation by Grand- Carteret, superficial though it is: "It is in scenes 
from the amorous life that one may in fact perceive the full ridiculousness of 
certain fashions. Aren't men and women grotesque in these gestures and atti- 
tudes — in the tufted forelock (already extravagant in itself), in the top hat and the 
nipped- waisted frockcoat, in the shawl, in the grandes pamelas, in the dainty fabric 
boots?" Thus, the confrontation with the fashions of previous generations is a 



Le Pont desplanetes (Interplanetary Bridge). Engraving by Grandville, 1844. See Bla,2. 



matter of far greater importance than we ordinarily suppose. And one of the 
most significant aspects of historical costuming is that — above all, in the thea- 
ter — it undertakes such a confrontation. Beyond the theater, the question of 
costume reaches deep into the life of art and poetry, where fashion is at once 
preserved and overcome. [Bla,4] 

A kindred problem arose with the advent of new velocities, which gave life an 
altered rhythm. This latter, too, was first tried out, as it were, in a spirit of play. 
The loop-the-loop came on the scene, and Parisians seized on this entertainment 
with a frenzy. A chronicler notes around 1810 that a lady squandered 75 francs in 
one evening at the Pare de Montsouris, where at that time you could ride those 
looping cars. The new tempo of life is often announced in the most unforeseen 
ways. For example, in posters. "These images of a day or an hour, bleached by 
the elements, charcoaled by urchins, scorched by the sun — although others are 
sometimes collected even before they have dried — symbolize to a higher degree 
even than the newspapers the sudden, shock-filled, multiform life that carries us 
away." Maurice Talmeyr, La Cite du sang (Paris, 1901), p. 269. In the early days 
of the poster, there was as yet no law to regulate the posting of bills or to provide 
protection for posters and indeed from posters; so one could wake up some 
morning to find one's window placarded. From time immemorial this enigmatic 
need for sensation has found satisfaction in fashion. But in its ground it will be 
reached at last only by theological inquiry, for such inquiry bespeaks a deep 
affective attitude toward historical process on the part of the human being. It is 
tempting to connect this need for sensation to one of the seven deadly sins, and it 
is not surprising that a chronicler adds apocalyptic prophecies to this connection 



and foretells a time when people will have been blinded by the effects of too 
much electric light and maddened by the tempo of news reporting. From Jacques 
Fabien, Paris en songe (Paris, 1863). [B2,l] 



"On October 4, 1856, the Gymnasium Theater presented a play entitled Les Toi- 
lettes Tmpageuses <The Flashy Dressers>. It was the heyday of the crinoline, and 
puffed-out women were in fashion. The actress playing the leading role, having 
grasped the satirical intentions of the author, wore a dress whose skirt, exagger- 
ated by design, had a fullness that was comical and almost ridiculous. The day 
after opening night, she was asked by more than twenty fine ladies to lend her 
dress as a model, and eight days later the crinoline had doubled in size." Maxime 



"Fashion is the recherche — the always vain, often ridiculous, sometimes danger- 
ous quest — for a superior ideal beauty." Du Camp, Paris, vol. 6, p. 294. [B2,3] 

The epigraph from Balzac is well suited to unfolding the temporality of hell: to 
showing how this time does not recognize death, and how fashion mocks death; 
how the acceleration of traffic and the tempo of news reporting (which conditions 
the quick succession of newspaper editions) aim at eliminating all discontinuities 
and sudden ends ; and how death as caesura belongs together with all the straight 
lines of divine temporality. — Were there fashions in antiquity? Or did the 
"authority of the frame" 5 preclude them? [B2,4] 

"She was everybody's contemporary." <Marcel> Jouhandeau, Prudence Haute- 
chaume (Paris, 1927), p. 129. To be contemporaine de tout le monde — that is the 
keenest and most secret satisfaction that fashion can offer a woman. [B2,5] 

An emblem of the power of fashion over the city of Paris: "I have purchased a 
map of Paris printed on a pocket handkerchief." Gutzkow, Briefe aus Paris, vol. 1 



Apropos of the medical discussion concerning the crinoline: Some people thought 
to justify its use, together with that of the petticoat, by noting "the agreeable and 
salutary coolness which the limbs enjoyed underneath. . . . Among doctors, [how- 
ever,] it is acknowledged that this celebrated coolness has already led to chills, and 
these have occasioned the unfortunately premature end of a situation which it was 
the original purpose of the crinoline to conceal." F. Th. Vischer, Kritische Gmnge, 
new series, no. 3 (Stuttgart, 1861), p. 100: "Verniinftige Gedanken iiber die jetzige 
Mode" <Reasonable Opinions on Current Fashions). [B2a,2] 



Du Camp, Paris, vol. 6<Paris, 1875>, p. 192. 



[B2,2] 



<Leipzig, 1842>, p. 82. 



[B2a,l] 



It was "madness for the French fashions of the Revolution and the First Empire to 
mimic Greek proportions with clothing cut and sewn in the modern manner." 
Vischer, "Verniinftige Gedanken iiber die jetzige Mode," p. 99. [B2a,3] 



Des damesd'un demi-raoral^raaisn'aynntpastledeini-jiipes 



Fashionable courtesans wearing crinolines. Lithograph by Honore Daumier, 1855. Tlie 
caption reads: "Ladies of the demi-monde, but havingno demi-skirts." See B2,2. 

A knit scarf — a brightly striped muffler — worn also, in muted colors, by men. 

[B2a,4] 

F. Th. Vischer on the men's fashion of wide sleeves that fall below the wrist: "What 
we have here are no longer arms but the rudiments of wings, stumps of penguin 
wings, fish fins. The movement of these shapeless appendages resembles the ges- 
ticulations — the sliding, jerking, paddling — of a fool or simpleton." Vischer, 
"Vernunftige Gedanken iiber die jetzige Mode," p. 111. [B2a,5] 

Important political critique of fashion from the standpoint of the bourgeois: 
"When the author of these reasonable opinions first saw, boarding a train, a 
young man wearing the newest style of shirt collar, he honestly thought that he 
was looking at a priest; for this white band encircles the neck at the same height 
as the well-known collar of the Catholic cleric, and moreover the long smock was 
black. On recognizing a layman in the very latest fashion, he immediately under- 
stood all that this shirt collar signifies: 'O, for us everything, everything is one — 
concordats included! And why not? Should we clamor for enlightenment like 
noble youths? Is not hierarchy more distinguished than the leveling effected by a 
shallow spiritual liberation, which in the end always aims at disturbing the pleas- 
ure of refined people?' — It may be added that this collar, in tracing a neat little 



line around the neck, gives its wearer the agreeable air of someone freshly be- 
headed, which accords so well with the character of the blase." To this is joined 
the violent reaction against purple. Vischer, "Vemirnftige Gedanken iiber die 
jetzige Mode," p. 1 12. [B2a,6] 



On the reaction of 1850-1860: "To show one's colors is considered ridiculous; to 
he strict is looked on as childish. In such a situation, how could dress not become 
equally colorless, flabby, and, at the same time, narrow?" Vischer, p. 117. He thus 
brings the crinoline into relation with that fortified "imperialism which spreads 
out and puffs up exactly like its image here, and which, as the last and strongest 
expression of the reflux of all the tendencies of the year 1848, settles its dominion 
like a hoop skirt over all aspects, good and had, justified and unjustified, of the 
revolution" (p. 119). [B2a,7] 



"At bottom, these things are simultaneously free and unfree. It is a twilight zone 
where necessity and humor interpenetrate. . . . The more fantastic a form, the 
more intensely the clear and ironic consciousness works by the side of the servile 
will. And this consciousness guarantees that the folly will not last; the more con- 
sciousness grows, the nearer comes the time when it acts, when it turns to deed, 
when it throws off the fetters." Vischer, pp. 122-123. [B2a,8] 

One of the most important texts for elucidating the eccentric, revolutionary, and 
surrealist possibilities of fashion — a text, above all, which establishes thereby the 
connection of Surrealism to Grandville and others — is the section on fashion in 
Apollinaire's Poete assassine (Paris, 1927), pp. 74ff.° [B2a,9] 

How fashion takes its cue from everything: Programs for evening clothes ap- 
peared, as if for the newest symphonic music. In 1901, in Paris, Victor Prouve 
exhibited a formal gown with the title, "Riverbank in Spring." [B2a,10] 

Hallmark of the period's fashions: to intimate a body that never knows full 
nakedness. [B3,l] 

"Around 1890 people discover that silk is no longer the most elegant material for 
street clothes; henceforth it is allotted the previously unknown function of lining. 
From 1870 to 1890, clothing is extraordinarily expensive, and changes in fashion 
are accordingly limited in many cases to prudent alterations by which new apparel 
can be derived from remodeling the old." 70 Jmhre deutsche Mode (1925), p. 71. 

[B3,2] 



"1873 . . . , when the giant skirts that stretched over cushions attached to the 
derriere, with their gathered draperies, their pleated frills, their embroidery, and 
their ribbons, seem to have issued less from the workshop of a tailor than from 



that of an upholsterer." J. W. Samson, Die Frmuenmode der Gegenwmrt (Berlin 
and Cologne, 1927), pp. 8-9. [B3,3] 



No immortalizing so unsettling as that of the ephemera and the fashionable 
forms preserved for us in the wax museum. And whoever has once seen her 
must, like Andre Breton, lose his heart to the female figure in the Musee Grevin 
who adjusts her garter in the corner of a loge. <Breton,> Nadja <Paris, 1928>, 
p. 199. 7 ' [B3,4] 

"The flower trimmings of large white lilies or water lilies with stems of rush, which 
look so charming in any coiffure, unintentionally remind one of delicate, gently 
floating sylphids and naiades. Just so, the fiery brunette cannot adorn herself 
more delightfully than with fruit braided in graceful little branches — cherries, red 
currants, even bunches of grapes mingled with ivy and flowering grasses — or than 
with long vivid red velvet fuchsias, whose leaves, red-veined and as though tinged 
with dew, form a crown; also at her disposal is the very lovely cmctus speciosus, 
with its long white filaments. In general, the flowers chosen for decorating the hair 
are quite large; we saw one such headdress of very picturesque and beautiful white 
roses entwined with large pansies and ivy branches, or rather boughs. The ar- 
rangement of the gnarled and tendriled branches was so felicitous that it seemed 
nature itself had lent a hand — long branches bearing buds and long stems swayed 
at the sides with the slightest motion." Der Bmztir, third year (Berlin, 1857), p. 11 
( Veronika von G . , "Die Mode"). [B3.5] 

The impression of the old-fashioned can arise only where, in a certain way, 
reference is made to the most topical. If the beginnings of modern architecture to 
some extent lie in the arcades, their antiquated effect on the present generation 
has exactly the same significance as the antiquated effect of a father on his son. 

[B3,6] 

In my formulation: "The eternal is in any case far more the ruffle on a dress than 
some idea." 8 D Dialectical Image D [B3,7] 

In fetishism, sex does away with the boundaries separating the organic world 
from the inorganic. Clothing and jewelry are its allies. It is as much at home with 
what is dead as it is with living flesh. The latter, moreover, shows it the way to 
establish itself in the former. Hair is a frontier region lying between the two 
kingdoms of sexus. Something different is disclosed in the drunkenness of pas- 
sion: the landscapes of the body. These are already no longer animated, yet are 
still accessible to the eye, which, of course, depends increasingly on touch and 
smell to be its guides through these reahns of death. Not seldom in the dream, 
however, there are swelling breasts that, like the earth, are all appareled in woods 
and rocks, and gazes have sent their life to the bottom of glassy lakes that 
slumber in the valleys. These landscapes are traversed by paths which lead 



sexuality into the world of the inorganic. Fashion itself is only another medium 
enticing it still more deeply into the universe of matter. [B3,8] 



'"This year,' said Tristouse, 'fashions are bizarre and common, simple and full of 
fantasy. Any material from nature's domain can now be introduced into the com- 
position of women's clothes. I saw a charming dress made of corks. ... A major 
designer is thinking about launching tailor-made outfits made of old bookbindings 
done in calf. . . . Fish bones are being worn a lot on hats. One often sees delicious 
young girls dressed like pilgrims of Saint James of Compostella; their outfits, as is 
fitting, are studded with coquilles Saint-Jacques. Steel, wool, sandstone, and files 
have suddenly entered the vestmentary arts. . . . Feathers now decorate not only 
hats but shoes and gloves; and next year they'll be on umbrellas. They're doing 
shoes in Venetian glass and hats in Baccarat crystal. ... I forgot to tell you that 
last Wednesday I saw on the boulevards on old dowager dressed in mirrors stuck 
to fabric. The effect was sumptuous in the sunlight. You'd have thought it was a 
gold mine out for a walk. Later it started raining and the lady looked like a silver 
mine. . . . Fashion is becoming practical and no longer looks down on anything. It 
ennobles everything. It does for materials what the Romantics did for words.'" 
Guillaume Apollinaire, Le Poete mssmssine, new edition (Paris, 1927), pp. 75-77. 9 

[B3a,l] 

A caricaturist — circa 1867 — represents the frame of a hoop skirt as a cage in 
which a girl imprisons hens and a parrot. See Louis Sonolet, Lm Vie pmrisienne 
sous le Second Empire (Paris, 1929), p. 245. [B3a,2] 

"It was bathing in the sea . . . that struck the first blow against the solemn and 
cumbersome crinoline." Louis Sonolet, L« Vie pmrisienne sous le Second Empire 
(Paris, 1929), p. 247. [B3a,3] 

"Fashion consists only in extremes. Inasmuch as it seeks the extremes by nature, 
there remains for it nothing more, when it has abandoned some particular form, 
than to give itself to the opposite form." 70 Jahre deutsche Mode (1925), p. 51. Its 
uttermost extremes: frivolity and death. [B3a,4] 

"We took the crinoline to be the symbol of the Second Empire in France — of its 
overblown lies, its hollow and purse-proud impudence. It toppled . . . , but . . . 
just before the fall of the Empire, the Parisian world had time to indulge another 
side of its temperament in women's fashions, and the Republic did not disdain to 
follow its lead." F. Th. Vischer, Mode und Cynismus (Stuttgart, 1879), p. 6. The 
new fashion to which Vischer alludes is explained: "The dress is cut diagonally 
across the hody and stretched over . . . the helly" (p. 6). A little later he speaks of 
the women thus attired as "naked in their clothes" (p. 8). [B3a,5] 

Friedell explains, with regard to women, "that the history of their dress shows 
surprisingly few variations. It is not much more than a regular rotation of a few 



quickly altering, but also quickly reinstated, nuances: the length of the train, the 
height of the coiffure, the shortness of the sleeves, the fullness of the skirt, the 
placement of the neckline and of the waist. Even radical revolutions like the boy- 
ish haircuts fashionable today are only the 'eternal return of the same. '" Egon 
Friedell, Kidturgeschichte der Neuzeit, vol. 3 (Munich, 1931), p. 88. Women's 
fashions are thus distinguished, according to the author, from the more diverse 
and more categorical fashions for men. [B4,l] 

"Of all the promises made by <Etienne> Cabet's novel Voyage en lemrie <Voyage to 
Icaria>, at least one has been realized. Cabet had in fact tried to prove in the novel, 
which contains his system, that the commnnist state of the future could admit no 
product of the imagination and could suffer no change in its institutions. He had 
therefore banned from Icaria all fashion — particularly the capricious priestesses 
of fashion, the modistes — as well as goldsmiths and all other professions that 
serve luxury, and had demanded that dress, utensils, and the like should never 
be altered." Sigmund Englander, Geschichte der franzdsischen Arbeiter- 
Associmtionen (Hamburg, 1864), vol. 2, pp. 165-166. [B4,2] 

In 1828 the first performance of La Muette de Portici took place. 10 It is an undulat- 
ing musical extravaganza, an opera made of draperies, which rise and subside 
over the words. It must have had its success at a time when drapery was begin- 
ning its triumphal procession (at first, in fashion, as Turkish shawls). This revolt, 
whose premier task is to protect the king from its own effect, appears as a prelude 
to that of 1830 — to a revolution that was indeed no more than drapery covering 
a slight reshuffle in the ruling circles. [B4,3] 

Does fashion die (as in Russia, for example) because it can no longer keep up the 
tempo — at least in certain fields? [B4,4] 

Grandville's works are true cosmogonies of fashion. Part of his oeuvre could be 
entitled "The Struggle of Fashion with Nature." Comparison between Hogarth 
and Grandville. Grandville and Lautreamont. — What is the significance of the 
hypertrophy of captions in Grandville? [B4,5] 

"Fashion ... is a witness, but a witness to the history of the great world only, for in 
every country . . . the poor people have fashions as little as they have a history, 
and their ideas, their tastes, even their lives barely change. Without doubt, . . . 
public life is beginning to penetrate the poorer households, but it will take time." 
Eugene Montrue, Le XIX° siecle vecu pmr deuxfrmnquis (Paris), p. 241. [B4,6] 

The following remark makes it possible to recognize how fashion functions as 
camouflage for quite specific interests of the ruling class. "Rulers have a great 
aversion to violent changes. They want everything to stay the same — if possible, 
for a thousand years. If possible, the moon should stand still and the sun move 
no farther in its course. Then no one would get hungry any more and want 



dinner. And when the rulers have fired their shot, the adversary should no longer 
be permitted to fire; their own shot should be the last." Bertolt Brecht, "Funf 
Schwierigkeiten beim Schreiben der Wahrheit," Unsere £eit, 8, nos. 2-3 (Paris, 
Basel, Prague, April 1935), p. 32. [B4a,l] 

MacOrlan, who emphasizes the analogies to Surrealism in Grandville's work, 
draws attention in this connection to the work of Walt Disney, on which he com- 
ments: "It is not in the least morbid. In this it diverges from the humor of Grand- 
vine, which always bore within itself the seeds of death." <Pierre> MacOrlan, 
"Grandville ie precurseur," Arts et metiers grmphiques, 44 (December 15, 1934), 
<p. 24>. [B4a,2] 

"The presentation of a large couture collection lasts two to three hours. Each 
time in accord with the tempo to which the models are accustomed. At the close, 
a veiled bride traditionally appears." Helen Grund, Vom We sen der Mode (Mu- 
nich: Privately printed, 1935), p. 19. In this practice, fashion makes reference to 
propriety while serving notice that it does not stand still before it. [B4a,3] 

A contemporary fashion and its significance. In the spring of 1935, something 
new appeared in women's fashions: medium-sized embossed metal plaquettes, 
which were worn on jumpers or overcoats and which displayed the initial letters 
of the bearer's first name. Fashion thus profited from the vogue for badges which 
had arisen among men in the wake of the patriotic leagues. On the other hand, 
the progressive restrictions on the private sphere are here given expression. The 
name — and, to be sure, the first name — of persons unknown is published on a 
lapel. That it becomes easier thereby to make the acquaintance of a stranger is of 
secondary importance. [B4a,4] 

"The creators of fashions . . . like to frequent society and extract from its grand 
doings an impression of the whole; they take part in its artistic life, are present at 
premieres and exhibitions, and read the hooks that make a sensation. In other 
words, they are inspired hy the . . . ferment . . . which the busy present day can 
offer. But since no present moment is ever fully cut of f from the past, the latter also 
will offer attractions to the creator, . . . though only that which harmonizes with 
the reigning tone can be used. The toque tipped forward over the forehead, a style 
we owe to the Manet exhibition, demonstrates quite simply our new readiness to 
confront the end of the previous century." Helen Grund, Vom Wesen der Mode, 
p. 13. [B4a,5] 

On the publicity war between the fashion house and the fashion columnists: "The 
fashion writer's task is made easier by the fact that our wishes coincide. Yet it is 
made more difficult by the fact that no newspaper or magazine may regard as new 
what another has already published. From this dilemma, we and the fashion 
writer are saved only by the photographers and designers, who manage through 
the pose and lighting to bring out different aspects of a single piece of clothing. The 



most important magazines . . . have their own photo studios, which are equipped 
with all the latest technical and artistic refinements, and which employ highly 
talented specialized photographers. . . . But the publication of these documents is 
not permitted until the customer has made her choice, and that means usually four 
to six weeks after the initial showing. The reason for this measure? — The woman 
who appears in society wearing these new clothes will herself not be denied the 
effect of surprise." Helen Grund, Vom Wesen der Mode, pp. 21-22. [B5,l] 

According to the summary of the first six issues, the magazine published by 
Stephane Mallarme, Lm. Dernier e Mode (Paris, 1874), contains "a delightful spor- 
tive sketch, the result of a conversation with the marvelous naturalist Toussenel." 
Reproduction of this summary in Minotmure, 2, no. 6 (Winter 1935) <p. 27>. 

[B5,2] 

A biological theory of fashion that takes its cue from the evolution of the zebra to 
the horse, as described in the abridged Brehm (p. 771): u "This evolution spanned 
millions of years. . . . The tendency in horses is toward the creation of a first-class 
runner and courser. . . . The most ancient of the existing animal types have con- 
spicuously striped coats. Now, it is very remarkable that the external stripes of the 
zebra display a certain correspondence to the arrangement of the ribs and the 
vertebra inside. One can also determine very clearly the arrangement of these 
parts from the unique striping on the upper foreleg and upper hind leg. What do 
these stripes signify? A protective function can be ruled out. . . . The stripes have 
been . . . preserved despite their 'purposelessness and even unsuitableness,' and 
therefore they must . . . have a particular significance. Isn't it likely that we are 
dealing here with outward stimuli for internal responses, such as would be espe- 
cially active during the mating season? What can this theory contribute to our 
theme? Something of fundamental importance, I believe. — Ever since humanity 
passed from nakedness to clothing, 'senseless and nonsensical' fashion has played 
the role of wise nature. . . . And insofar as fashion in its mutations . . . prescribes 
a constant revision of all elements of the figure, ... it ordains for the woman a 
continual preoccupation with her beauty." Helen Grund, Vom Wesen der Mode, 
pp. 7-8. [B5,3] 

At the Paris world exhibition of 1900 there was a Palais du Costume, in which wax 
dolls arranged before a painted backdrop displayed the costumes of various peo- 
ples and the fashions of various ages. [B5a,l] 

"But as for us, we see . . . around us . . . the effects of confusion and waste inflicted 
by the disordered movement of the world today. Art knows no compromise with 
hurry. Our ideals are good for ten years! The ancient and excellent reliance on the 
judgment of posterity has been stupidly replaced by the ridiculous superstition of 
novelty, which assigns the most illusory ends to our enterprises, condemning them 
to the creation of what is most perishable, of what must be perishable by its 
nature: the sensation of newness. . . . Now, everything to be seen here has been 



enjoyed, has charmed and delighted through the centuries, and the whole glory of 
it calmly tells us: 'I AM NOTHING NET. Time may well spoil the material in which I 
exist; but for so long as it does not destroy me, I cannot be destroyed by the 
indifference or contempt of any man worthy of the name." Paul Valery, "Pream- 
bule" (preface to the catalogue of the exhibition "Italian Art from Cimabue to 
Tiepolo," at the Petit Palais, 1935), pp. iv, vii. 12 [B5a,2] 

"The ascendancy of the bourgeoisie works a change in women's wear. Clothing and 
hairstyles take on added dimensions . . . ; shoulders are enlarged by leg-of-mutton 
sleeves, and ... it was not long before the old hoop-petticoats came back into favor 
and full skirts were the thing. Women, thus accoutered, appeared destined for a 
sedentary life — family life — since their manner of dress had about it nothing that 
couldever suggest or seem to further the idea of movement. It was just the opposite 
with the advent of the Second Empire: family ties grew slack, and an ever-increas- 
ing luxury corrupted morals to such an extent that it became difficult to distin- 
guish an honest woman from a courtesan on the basis of clothing alone. Feminine 
attire had thus been transformed from head to toe. . . . Hoop skirts went the way 
of the accentuated rear. Everything that could keep women from remaining seated 
was encouraged; anything that could have impeded their walking was avoided. 
They wore their hair and their clothes as though they were to be viewed in profile. 
For the profile is the silhouette of someone . . . who passes, who is about to vanish 
from our sight. Dress became an image of the rapid movement that carries away 
the world." Charles Blanc, "Considerations sur le vetement des femmes" (Institut 
tie France, October 25, 1872), pp. 12-13. [B5a,3] 

"In order to grasp the essence of contemporary fashion, one need not recur to 
motives of an individual nature, such as . . . the desire for change, the sense of 
beauty, the passion for dressing up, the drive to conform. Doubtless such motives 
have, at various times, . . . played a part ... in the creation of clothes. . . . Never- 
theless, fashion, as we understand it today, has no individual motives but only a 
social motive, and it is an accurate perception of this social motive that determines 
the full appreciation of fashion's essence. This motive is the effort to distinguish 
the higher classes of society from the lower, or more especially from the middle 
classes .... Fashion is the barrier — continually raised anew hecause continually 
torn down — by which the fashionable world seeks to segregate itself from the 
middle region of society; it is the mad pursuit of that class vanity through which a 
single phenomenon endlessly repeats itself: the endeavor of one group to establish 
a lead, however minimal, over its pursuers, and the endeavor of the other group to 
make up the distance by immediately adopting the newest fashions of the leaders. 
The characteristic features of contemporary fashion are thus explained: above all, 
its origins in the upper circles and its imitation in the middle strata of society. 
Fashion moves from top to bottom, not vice versa. . . . An attempt by the middle 
classes to introduce a new fashion would . . . never succeed, though nothing would 
suit the upper classes better than to see the former with their own set of fashions. 
([Note:] Which does not deter them from looking for new designs in the sewer of 



the Parisian demi-monde and bringing out fashions that clearly bear the mark of 
their unseemly origins, as Fr. Vischer . . . has pointed out in his . . . widely cen- 
sured but, to my mind, . . . highly meritorious essay on fashion.) Hence the un- 
ceasing variation of fashion. No sooner have the middle classes adopted a newly 
introduced fashion than it . . . loses its value for the upper classes. . . . Thus, 
novelty is the indispensable condition for all fashion. . . . The duration of a fash- 
ion is inversely proportional to the swiftness of its diffusion; the ephemerality of 
fashions has increased in our day as the means for their diffusion have expanded 
via our perfected communications techniques. . . . The social motive referred to 
above explains, finally, the third characteristic feature of contemporary fashion: 
its . . . tyranny. Fashion comprises the outward criterion for judging whether or 
not one 'belongs in polite society.' Whoever does not repudiate it altogether must 
go along, even where he . . . firmly refuses some new development. . . . With this, a 
judgment is passed on fashion. ... If the classes that are weak and foolish enough 
to imitate it were to gain a sense of their own proper worth, ... it would be all up 
with fashion, and beauty could once again assume the position it has had with all 
those peoples who . . . did not feel the need to accentuate class differences through 
clothing or, where this occurred , were sensible enough to respect them." Rudolph 
von Jhering, Der Zweck im Recht, vol. 2 (Leipzig, 1883), pp. 234—238. 13 

[B6; B6a,l] 

On the epoch of Napoleon HI: "Making money becomes the object of an almost 
sensual fervor, and love becomes a financial concern. In the age of French Roman- 
ticism, the erotic ideal was the working girl who gives herself; now it is the tart who 
sells herself. ... A hoydenish nuance came into fashion: ladies wore collars and 
cravats, overcoats, dresses cut like tailcoats, . . . jackets a la Zouave, dolmans, 
walking sticks, monocles. Loud, harshly contrasting colors are preferred — for the 
coiffure as well: fiery red hair is very popular. . . . The paragon of fashion is the 
grmnde dmme who plays the cocotte." Egon Friedell, Kultur geschichte der 
Neuzeit, vol. 3 (Munich, 1931), p. 203. The "plebeian character" of this fashion 
represents, for the author, an "invasion . . . from below" by the nouveaux riches. 

[B6a,2] 

"Cotton fahrics replace brocades and satins, . . . and before long, thanks to . . . 
the revolutionary spirit, the dress of the lower classes becomes more seemly and 
agreeable to the eye." Edouard Foucaud, Paris inventeur: Physiologie de I'indus- 
triefrm.nqm.ise (Paris, 1844), p. 64 (referring to the Revolution of 1789). [B6a,3] 

An assemblage which, on closer inspection, proves to be composed entirely of 
pieces of clothing together with assorted dolls' heads. Caption: "Dolls on chairs, 
mannequins with false necks, false hair, false attractions — voila Longchamp!" 
Cahinet des Estampes. [B6a,4] 

"If, in 1829, we were to enter the shops of Delisle, we would find a multitude 
of diverse fabrics: Japanese, Alhambresque, coarse oriental, stocoline, meotide, 



silenian, zinzoline, Chinese Bagazinkoff. . . . With the Revolution of 1830, . . . the 
court of fashion had crossed the Seine and the Chaussee d'Antin had replaced the 
aristocratic faubourg." Paul d'Ariste, Lm Vie et le monde du boulevmrd, 1830- 
1870 <Paris, 1930>, p. 227. [B6a,5] 

"The well-to-do bourgeois, as a friend of order, pays his suppliers at least once a 
year; but the man of fashion, the so-called lion, pays his tailor every ten years, if 
he pays him at all." Acht Tage in Paris (Paris, July 1855), p. 125. [B7,l] 

"It is I who invented tics. At present, the lorgnon has replaced them. . . . The tic 
involves closing the eye with a certain movement of the mouth and a certain move- 
ment of the coat. . . . The face of an elegant man should always have . . . something 
irritated and convulsive about it. One can attribute these facial agitations either to 
a natural satanism, to the fever of the passions, or finally to anything one likes." 
Pmris-Viveui; by the authors of the memoirs of Bilboquet [Taxile Delord] (Paris, 
1854), pp. 25-26. [B7,2] 

"The vogue for buying one's wardrobe in London took hold only among men; the 
fashion among women, even foreigners, has always been to be outfitted in Paris." 
Charles Seignobos, Histoire sincere de lm nation frm.ngm.ise (Paris, 1932), p. 402. 

[B7,3] 

Marcelin, the founder of Lm Vie Pmrisienne, has set forth "the four ages of the 
crinoline." [B7,4] 

The crinoline is "the unmistakable symbol of reaction on the part of an imperial- 
ism that spreads out and puffs up ... , and that . . . settles its dominion like a hoop 
skirt over all aspects, good and bad, justified and unjustified, of the revolu- 
tion. ... It seemed a caprice of the moment, and it has established itself as the 
emblem of a period, like the Second of December." 14 F. Th. Vischer, cited in 
Eduard Fuchs, Die Kmrikmtur der europmischen Volker (Munich <1921>), vol. 2, 
p. 156. [B7,5] 

In the early 1840s, there is a nucleus of modistes on the Rue Vivienne. [B7,6] 

Simmel calls attention to the fact that "the inventions of fashion at the present 
time are increasingly incorporated into the objective situation of labor in the 
economy. . . . Nowhere does an article first appear and then become a fashion; 
rather, articles are introduced for the express purpose of becoming fashions." 
The contrast put forward in the last sentence may be correlated, to a certain 
extent, with that between the feudal and bourgeois eras. Georg Simmel, Philoso- 
phische Kultur (Leipzig, 1911), p. 34 ("Die Mode"). 15 [B7,7] 



Sinunel explains "why women in general are the staunchest adherents of fash- 
ion. . . . Specifically: from the weakness of the social position to which women have 



been condemned for the greater part of history derives their intimate relation with 
all that is 'etiquette.'" GeorgSimmel, Philosophische Kultur (Leipzig, 1911), p. 47 
("Die Mode"). l « [B7,8] 

The following analysis of fashion incidentally throws a light on the significance of 
the trips that were fashionable among the bourgeoisie during the second half of 
the century. "The accent of attractions builds from their substantial center to 
their inception and their end. This begins with the most trifling symptoms, such 
as the . . . switch from a cigar to a cigarette; it is fully manifest in the passion for 
traveling, which, with its strong accentuations of departure and arrival, sets the 
life of the year vibrating as fully as possible in several short periods. The . . . 
tempo of modern life bespeaks not only the yearning for quick changes in the 
qualitative content of life, but also the force of the formal attraction of the bound- 
ary — of inception and end." Georg Simmel, Philosophuche Kultur (Leipzig, 1911), 
p. 41 ("Die Mode").' 7 [B7a,l] 

Simmel asserts that "fashions differ for different classes — the fashions of the up- 
per stratum of society are never identical with those of the lower; in fact, they are 
abandoned by the former as soon as the latter prepares to appropriate them." 
Georg Simmel, Philosophische Kultur (Leipzig, 1911), p. 32 ("Die Mode"). lB 

[B7a,2] 

The quick changing of fashion means "that fashions can no longer be so expensive 
... as they were in earlier times. ... A peculiar circle . . . arises here: the more an 
article becomes subject to rapid changes of fashion, the greater the demand for 
cheap products of its kind; and the cheaper they become, the more they invite 
consumers and constrain producers to a quick change of fashion." Georg Simmel, 
Philosophische Kultur (Leipzig, 1911), pp. 58-59 ("Die Mode"). 1 '' [B7a,3] 

Fuchs on Jhering's analysis of fashion: "It must ... be reiterated that the concern 
for segregating the classes is only one cause of the frequent variation in fashions, 
and that a second cause — the private-capitalist mode of production, which in the 
interests of its profit margin must continually multiply the possibilities of turn- 
over — is of equal importance. This cause has escaped Jhering entirely, as has a 
third: the function of erotic stimulation in fashion, which operates most effectively 
when the erotic attractions of the man or the woman appear in ever new set- 
tings. . . . Friedrich Vischer, who wrote about fashion . . . twenty years before 
Jhering, did not yet recognize, in the genesis of fashion, the tendencies at work to 
keep the classes divided; ... on the other hand, he was fully aware of the erotic 
problems of dress." Eduard Fuchs, Illustrierte Sittengeschichte vom Mittelmlter 
his zur Gegenwmrt: Das biirgerliche Zeitmlter, enlarged edition (Munich <1926'?>), 
pp. 53-54. [B7a,4] 



Eduard Fuchs (Illustrierte Sittengeschichte vom Mittelmlter bis zur Gegenwmrt: 
Dms biirgerliche Zeitmlter, enlarged ed. , pp. 56-57) cites — without references — a 



remark by F. Th. Vischer, according to which the gray of men's clothing symbol- 
izes the "utterly blase" character of the masculine world, its dullness and inertia. 

[B8.1] 

"One of the surest and most deplorable symptoms of that weakness and frivolity of 
character which marked the Romantic age was the childish and fatal notion of 
rejecting the deepest understanding of technical procedures, . . . the consciously 
sustained and orderly carrying through of a work . . . — all for the sake of the 
spontaneous impulses of the individual sensibility. The idea of creating works of 
lasting value lost force and gave way, in most minds, to the desire to astonish; art 
was condemned to a whole series of breaks with the past. There arose an automatic 
audacity, which became as obligatory as tradition had been. Finally, that switch- 
ing — at high frequency — of the tastes of a given public, which is called Fashion, 
replaced with its essential changeableness the old habit of slowly forming styles, 
schools, and reputations. To say that Fashion took over the destinies of the fine 
arts is as much as to say that commercial interests were creeping in." Paul Valery, 
Pieces sur Vmrt (Paris), pp. 187-188 ("Autour de Corot"). 2 " [B8,2] 

"The great and fundamental revolution has been in cotton prints. It has required 
the combined efforts of science and art to force rebellious and ungrateful cotton 
fabrics to undergo every day so many brilliant transformations and to spread 
them everywhere within the reach of the poor. Every woman used to wear a blue or 
black dress that she kept for ten years without washing, for fear it might tear to 
pieces. But now her husband, a poor worker, covers her with a robe of flowers for 
the price of a day's labor. All the women of the people who display an iris of a 
thousand colors on our promenades were formerly in mourning." J. Michelet, Le 
Peuple (Paris, 1846), pp. 80-81. 21 [B8,3] 

"It is no longer art, as in earlier times, but the clothing business that furnishes the 
prototype of the modern man and woman. . . . Mannequins become the model for 
imitation, and the soul becomes the image of the body." Henri Polles, "L'Art du 
commerce," Vendredi, <12> (February 1937). Compare tics and English fashions 
for men. [B8,4] 

"One can estimate that, in Harmony, the changes in fashion . . . and the imperfec- 
tions in manufacturing would occasion an annual loss of 500 francs per person, 
since even the poorest of Harmonians has a wardrobe of clothes for every sea- 
son. . . . As far as clothing and furniture are concerned, . . . Harmony . . . aims 
for infinite variety with the least possible consumption. . . . The excellence of the 
products of societary industry . . . entail perfection for each and every manufac- 
tured object, so that furniture and clothing . . . become eternal." <Fourier,> cited 
in Armand and Maublanc, Fourier (Paris, 1937), vol. 2, pp. 196, 198. [B8a,l] 

"This taste for modernity is developed to such an extent that Baudelaire, like 
Balzac, extends it to the most trifling details of fashion and dress. Both writers 



study these things in themselves and turn them into moral and philosophical ques- 
tions, for these things represent immediate reality in its keenest, most aggressive, 
and perhaps most irritating guise, but also as it is most generally experienced." 
[Note:] "Besides, for Baudelaire, these matters link up with his important theory 
of dandyism, where it is a question, precisely, of morality and modernity." Roger 
Caillois, "Paris, mythe moderne," Nouvelle Revue frtrnqmise, 25, no. 284> (May 1, 
1937), p. 692. [B8a,2] 

"Sensational event! The belles dames, one fine day, decide to puff up the derriere. 
Quick, by the thousands, hoop factories! . . . But what is a simple refinement on 
illustrious coccyxes? A trumpery, no more. . . . 'Away with the rump! Long live 
crinolines!' And suddenly the civilized world turns to the production of ambula- 
tory bells. Why has the fair sex forgotten the delights of hand bells? ... It is not 
enough to keep one's place; you must make some noise down there. . . . The qumr- 
tier Breda and the Faubourg Saint-Germain are rivals in piety, no less than in 
plasters and chignons. They might as well take the church as their model! At 
vespers, the organ and the clergy take turns intoning a verse from the Psalms. The 
fine ladies with their little bells could follow this example, words and tintinnabula- 
tion by turns spurring on the conversation." A. Blanqui, Critique socimle (Paris, 
1885), vol. 1, pp. 83-84 ("Le Luxe"). — "Le Luxe" is a polemic against theluxury- 
goods industry. [B8a,3] 

Each generation experiences the fashions of the one immediately preceding it as 
the most radical antiaphrodisiac imaginable. In this judgment it is not so far off 
the mark as might be supposed. Every fashion is to some extent a bitter satire on 
love; in every fashion, perversities are suggested by the most ruthless means. 
Every fashion stands in opposition to the organic. Every fashion couples the 
living body to the inorganic world. To the living, fashion defends the rights of the 
corpse. The fetishism that succumbs to the sex appeal of the inorganic is its vital 
nerve. [B9,l] 

Where they impinge on the present moment, birth and death — the former 
through natural circumstances, the latter through social ones — considerably re- 
strict the field of play for fashion. This state of affairs is properly elucidated 
through two parallel circumstances. The first concerns birth, and shows the 
natural engendering of life "overcome" <aufgehoben> by novelty in the realm of 
fashion. The second circumstance concerns death: it appears in fashion as no less 
"overcome," and precisely through the sex appeal of the inorganic, which is 
something generated by fashion. [B9,2] 

The detailing of feminine beauties so dear to the poetry of the Baroque, a process 
in which each single part is exalted through a trope, secretly links up with the 
image of the corpse. This parceling out of feminine beauty into its noteworthy 
constituents resembles a dissection, and the popular comparisons of bodily parts 
to alabaster, snow, precious stones, or other (mostly inorganic) formations makes 



the same point. (Such dismemberment occurs also in Baudelaire: "Le Beau 
Navire.") [B9,3] 



Lipps on the somber cast of men's clothing: He thinks that "our general aversion to 
bright colors, especially in clothing for men, evinces very clearly an oft-noted 
peculiarity of our character. Gray is all theory; green — and not only green but also 
red, yellow, blue — is the golden tree of life. 22 In our predilection for the various 
shades of gray . . . running to black, we fi nd an unmistakable social reflection of 
our tendency to privilege the theory of the formation of intellect above all else. 
Even the beautiful we can no longer just enjoy; rather, ... we must first subject it 
to criticism, with the consequence that . . . our spiritual life becomes ever more 
cool and colorless." Theodor Lipps, "TJber die Symbolik unserer Kleidung," Nord 
und Siid, 33 (Breslau and Berlin, 1885), p. 352. [B9,4] 

Fashions are a collective medicament for the ravages of oblivion. The more short- 
lived a period, the more susceptible it is to fashion. Compare K2a,3. [B9a,l] 

Focillon on the phantasmagoria of fashion: "Most often ... it creates hybrids; it 
imposes on the human being the profile of an animal. . . . Fashion thus invents an 
artificial humanity which is not the passive decoration of a formal environment, 
but that very environment itself. Such a humanity — by turns heraldic, theatrical, 
fantastical, architectural — takes, as its ruling principle, the poetics of ornament, 
and what it calls 'line' ... is perhaps hut a subtle compromise between a certain 
physiological canon . . . and imaginative design." Henri Focillon, Vie des formes 
(Paris, 1934), p. 41. 23 [B9a,2] 

There is hardly another article of dress that can give expression to such divergent 
erotic tendencies, and that has so much latitude to disguise them, as a woman's 
hat. Whereas the meaning of male headgear in its sphere (the political) is strictly 
tied to a few rigid patterns, the shades of erotic meaning in a woman's hat are 
virtually incalculable. It is not so much the various possibilities of symbolic 
reference to the sexual organs that is chiefly of interest here. More surprising is 
what a hat can say about the rest of the outfit. H<elen> Grund has made the 
ingenious suggestion that the bonnet, which is contemporaneous with the crino- 
line, actually provides men with directions for managing the latter. The wide 
brim of the bonnet is turned up — thereby demonstrating how the crinoline must 
be turned up in order to make sexual access to the woman easier for the man. 

[B10.1] 

For the females of the species homo sapiens — at the earliest conceivable period of 
its existence — the horizontal positioning of the body must have had the greatest 
advantages. It made pregnancy easier for them, as can be deduced from the 
back-bracing girdles and trasses to which pregnant women today have recourse. 
Proceeding from this consideration, one may perhaps venture to ask: Mightn't 
walking erect, in general, have appeared earlier in men than in women? In that 



case, the woman would have been the four-footed companion of the man, as the 
dog or cat is today. And it seems only a step from this conception to the idea that 
the frontal encounter of the two partners in coitus would have been originally a 
kind of perversion; and perhaps it was by way of this deviance that the woman 
would have begun to walk upright. (See note in the essay "Eduard Fuchs : Der 
Sanunler und der Historiker.") 24 [B10.2] 

"It would ... he interesting to trace the effects exerted by this disposition to 
upright posture on the structure and function of the rest of the body. There is no 
doubt that all the particulars of an organic entity are held together in intimate 
cohesion, but with the present state of our scientific knowledge we must maintain 
that the extraordinary influences ascribed herewith to standing upright cannot in 
fact be proved. . . . No significant repercussion can be demonstrated for the struc- 
ture and function of the inner organs, and Herder's hypotheses — according to 
which all forces would react differently in the upright posture, and the blood 
stimulate the nerves differently — forfeit all credibility as soon as they are referred 
to differences manifestly important for behavior." Hermann Lotze, Mikrokosmos 



A passage from a cosmetics prospectus , characteristic of the fashions of the Second 
Empire. The manufacturer recommends "a cosmetic ... by means of which ladies, 
if they so desire, can give their complexion the gloss of rose taffeta." Cited in 
Ludwig Borne, Gesammelte Schriften (Hamburg and Frankfurt am Main, 1862), 



(Leipzig, 1858), vol. 2, p. 90. 25 



[BlOa.l] 



vol. 3, p. 282 ("Die Industrie-AussteLlung im Louvre"). 



[Bl0a,2] 