[Ancient Paris, Catacombs, Demolitions, 
Decline of Paris] 



Easy the way that leads into Avemus. 
—Virgil 1 

Even the automobiles have an air of antiquity here. 
— Guillaurne Apollinaire 2 



How gratings — as aJlegories — have their place in hell. In the Passage Vivienne, 
sculptures over the main entrance representing allegories of commerce. [ C 1 , 1 ] 

Surrealism was born in an arcade. And under the protection of what muses! 

[C1.2] 

The father of Surrealism was Dada; its mother was an arcade. Dada, when the 
two first met, was already old. At the end of 1919, Aragon and Breton, out of 
antipathy to Montparnasse and Montmartre, transferred the site of their meet- 
ings with friends to a cafe in the Passage de l'Opera. Construction of the Boule- 
vard Haussmann brought about the demise of the Passage de l'Opera. Louis 
Aragon devoted 135 pages to this arcade; in the sum of these three digits hides 
the number nine — the number of muses who bestowed their gifts on the new- 
born Surrealism. They are named Luna, Countess Geschwitz, Kate Greenaway, 
Mors, Cleo de Merode, Dulcinea, Libido, Baby Cadum, and Friederike Kemp- 
ner. (Instead of Countess Geschwitz: Tipse?) :i [CI, 3] 

Cashier as Banae. [CI, 4] 

Pausanias produced his topography of Greece around A.D. 200, at a time when the 
cult sites and many other monuments had begun to fall into ruin. [CI, 5] 

Few things in the history of humanity are as well known to us as the history of 
Paris. Tens of thousands of volumes are dedicated solely to the investigation of 



this tiny spot on the earth's surface. Authentic guides to the antiquities of the old 
Roman city — Lutetia Parisorum — appear as early as the sixteenth century. The 
catalogue of the imperial library, printed during the reign of Napoleon III, con- 
tains nearly a hundred pages under the rubric "Paris," and this collection is far 
from complete. Many of the main thoroughfares have their own special litera- 
ture, and we possess written accounts of thousands of the most inconspicuous 
houses. In a beautiful turn of phrase, Hugo von Hofmannsthal called <this city> 
"a landscape built of pure life." And at work in the attraction it exercises on 
people is the kind of beauty that is proper to great landscapes — more precisely, to 
volcanic landscapes. Paris is a counterpart in the social order to what Vesuvius is 
in the geographic order: a menacing, hazardous massif, an ever-active hotbed of 
revolution. But just as the slopes of Vesuvius, thanks to the layers of lava that 
cover them, have been transformed into paradisal orchards, so the lava of revolu- 
tions provides uniquely fertile ground for the blossoming of art, festivity, fashion. 
D Fashion D [Cl,6] 

Balzac has secured the mythic constitution of his world through precise topo- 
graphic contours. Paris is the breeding ground of his mythology — Paris with its 
two or three great bankers (Nucingen, du Tillet), Paris with its great physician 
Horace Bianchon, with its entrepreneur Cesar Birotteau, with its four or five 
great cocottes, with its usurer Gobseck, with its sundry advocates and soldiers. 
But above all — and we see this again and again — it is from the same streets and 
corners, the same little rooms and recesses, that the figures of this world step into 
the light. What else can this mean but that topography is the ground plan of this 
mythic space of tradition < lraditiomraum>, as it is of every such space, and that it 
can become indeed its key — just as it was the key to Greece for Pausanias, and 
just as the history and situation of the Paris arcades are to become the key for the 
underworld of this century, into which Paris has sunk. [CI, 7] 

To construct the city topographically — tenfold and a hundredfold — from out of 
its arcades and its gateways, its cemeteries and bordellos, its railroad stations and 
its ... , just as formerly it was defi ned by its churches and its markets. And the 
more secret, more deeply embedded figures of the city: murders and rebellions, 
the bloody knots in the network of the streets, lairs of love, and conflagrations. 
0 Flaneur 0 [Cl,8] 

Couldn't an exciting film be made from the map of Paris? From the unfolding of 
its various aspects in temporal succession? From the compression of a centuries- 
long movement of streets, boulevards, arcades, and squares into the space of half 
an hour? And does the flaneur do anything different? D Flaneur D [CI, 9] 

"Two steps from the Palais-Royal, between the Cour des Fontaines and the Rue 
Neuve-des-Bons-Enfants, there is a dark and tortuous little arcade adorned by a 
public scribe and a greengrocer. It could resemble the cave of Cacus or of Tro- 



phonius, but it could never resemble an arcade — even with good will and gas 
lighting." <Alfred> Delvau, Les Dessous de Paris (Paris, 1860), pp. 105-106. 

[Cla,l] 

One knew of places in ancient Greece where the way led down into the under- 
world. Our waking existence likewise is a land which, at certain hidden points, 
leads down into the underworld — a land full of inconspicuous places from which 
dreams arise. All day long, suspecting nothing, we pass them by, but no sooner 
has sleep come than we are eagerly groping our way back to lose ourselves in the 
dark corridors. By day, the labyrinth of urban dwellings resembles conscious- 
ness; the arcades (which are galleries leading into the city's past) issue unre- 
marked onto the streets. At night, however, under the tenebrous mass of the 
houses, their denser darkness protrudes like a threat, and the nocturnal pedes- 
trian hurries past — unless, that is, we have emboldened him to turn into the 
narrow lane. 

But another system of galleries runs underground through Paris : the Metro, 
where at dusk glowing red lights point the way into the underworld of names. 
Combat, Elysee, Georges V, Etienne Marcel, Solferino, Invalides, Vaugirard — 
they have all thrown off the humiliating fetters of street or square, and here in the 
lightning-scored, whistle-resounding darkness are transformed into misshapen 
sewer gods, catacomb fairies. This labyrinth harbors in its interior not one but a 
dozen blind raging bulls, into whose jaws not one Theban virgin once a year but 
thousands of anemic young dressmakers and drowsy clerks every morning must 
hurl themselves. D Street Names D Here, underground, nothing more of the colli- 
sion, the intersection, of names — that which aboveground forms the linguistic 
network of the city. Here each name dwells alone; hell is its demesne. Amer, 
Picon, Dubonnet are guardians of the threshold. [Cla,2] 

"Doesn't every quartier have its true apogee some time before it is fully built up? 
At that point its planet describes a curve as it draws near businesses, first the large 
and then the small. So long as the street is still somewhat new, it belongs to the 
common people; it gets clear of them only when it is smiled on by fashion. Without 
naming prices, the interested parties dispute among themselves for the rights to 
the small houses and the apartments, but only so long as the beautiful women, the 
ones with the radiant elegance that adorns not only the salon but the whole house 
and even the street, continue to hold their receptions. And should the lady become 
a pedestrian, she will want some shops, and often the street must pay not a little for 
acceding too quickly to this wish. Courtyards are made smaller, and many are 
entirely done away with; the houses draw closer together. In the end, there comes 
a New Year's Day when it is considered bad form to have such an address on one's 
visiting card. By then the majority of tenants are businesses only, and the gateways 
of the neighborhood no longer have much to lose if now and again they furnish 
asylum for one of the small tradespeople whose miserahle stalls have replaced the 
shops." <Charles> Lefeuve, Les An.cienn.es Maisons de Paris sous Napoleon III 
(Paris and Brussels, 1873), vol. 1, p. 482. 1 □ Fashion D [Cla,3] 



It is a sad testimony to the underdeveloped amour-propre of most of the great 
European cities that so very few of them — at any rate, none of the German 
cities — have anything like the handy, minutely detailed, and durable map that 
exists for Paris. I refer to the excellent publication by Taride, with its twenty-two 
maps of all the Parisian arrondissements and the parks of Boulogne and Vmcennes. 
Whoever has stood on a streetcorner of a strange city in bad weather and had to 
deal with one of those large paper maps — which at every gust swell up like a sail, 
rip at the edges, and soon are no more than a little heap of dirty colored scraps 
with which one torments oneself as with the pieces of a puzzle — learns from the 
study of the Plan Taride what a city map can be. People whose imagination does 
not wake at the perusal of such a text, people who would not rather dream of 
their Paris experiences over a map than over photos or travel notes, are beyond 
help. [Cla,4] 

Paris is built over a system of caverns from which the din of Metro and railroad 
mounts to the surface, and in which every passing omnibus or truck sets up a 
prolonged echo. And this great technological system of tunnels and thorough- 
fares interconnects with the ancient vaults, the limestone quarries, the grottoes 
and catacombs which, since the early Middle Ages, have time and again been 
reentered and traversed. Even today, for the price of two francs, one can buy a 
ticket of admission to this most nocturnal Paris, so much less expensive and less 
hazardous than the Paris of the upper world. The Middle Ages saw it differently. 
Sources tell us that there were clever persons who now and again, after exacting 
a considerable sum and a vow of silence, undertook to guide their fellow citizens 
underground and show them the Devil in his infernal majesty. A financial ven- 
ture far less risky for the swindled than for the swindlers: Must not the church 
have considered a spurious manifestation of the Devil as tantamount to blas- 
phemy? In other ways, too, this subterranean city had its uses, for those who 
knew their way around it. Its streets cut through the great customs barrier with 
which the Farmers General had secured their right to receive duties on imports, 
and in the sixteenth and eighteenth centuries smuggling operations went on for 
the most part below ground. We know also that in times of public commotion 
mysterious rumors traveled very quickly via the catacombs, to say nothing of the 
prophetic spirits and fortunetellers duly qualified to pronounce upon them. On 
the day after Louis XVI fled Paris, the revolutionary government issued bills 
ordering a thorough search of these passages. And a few years later a rumor 
suddenly spread through the population that certain areas of town were about to 
cavern. [C2,l] 

To reconstruct the city also from its/orat«ines <springs, wells>. "Some streets have 
preserved these in name, although the most celebrated among them, the Puits 
d' Amour <Well of Love>, which was located not far from the marketplace on the 
Rue de la Truanderie, has been dried, filled up, and smoothed over without a trace 
remaining. Hence, there is hardly anything left of the echoing wells which pro- 
vided a name for the Rue du Puits-qui-Parle, or of the wells which the tanner 



Adam-l'Hermite had dug in the quartier Saint-Victor. We have known the Rues de 
Puits-Mauconseil, du Puits-de-Fer, du Puits-du-Chapitre, du Puits-Certain, du 
Bon-Puits, and finally the Rue du Puits, which, after being the Rue du Bout-du- 
Monde, became the Impasse Saint-Claude-Montmartre. The marketplace wells, 
the bucket-drawn wells, the water carriers are all giving way to the public wells, 
and our children, who will easily draw water even on the top floors of the tallest 
buildings in Paris, will be amazed that we have preserved for so long these primi- 
tive means of supplying one of humankind's most imperious needs." Maxime du 
Camp, Paris: Ses organ.es, sesfonctions et sa vie (Paris, 1875), vol. 5, p. 263. 

[C2.2] 

A different topography, not architectonic but anthropocentric in conception, 
could show us all at once, and in its true light, the most muted quartier: the 
isolated fourteenth arrondusement. That, at any rate, is how Jules Janin already 
saw it a hundred years ago. If you were born into that neighborhood, you could 
lead the most animated and audacious life without ever having to leave it. For in 
it are found, one after another, all the buildings of public misery, of proletarian 
indigence, in unbroken succession: the birthing clinic, the orphanage, the hospi- 
tal (the famous Sante), and finally the great Paris jail with its scaffold. At night, 
one sees on the narrow unobtrusive benches — not, of course, the comfortable 
ones found in the squares — men stretched out asleep as if in the waiting room of 
a way station in the course of this terrible journey. [C2,3] 

There are architectonic emblems of commerce: steps lead to the apothecary, 
whereas the cigar shop has taken possession of the corner. The business world 
knows to make use of the threshold. In front of the arcade, the skating rink, the 
swimming pool, the railroad platform, stands the tutelary of the threshold: a hen 
that automatically lays tin eggs containing bonbons. Next to the hen, an auto- 
mated fortuneteller — an apparatus for stamping our names automatically on a 
tin band, which fixes our fate to our collar. [C2,4] 

In old Paris, there were executions (for example, by hanging) in the open street. 

[C2,5] 

Rodenberg speaks of the "stygian existence" of certain worthless securities — such 
as shares in the Mires fund — which are sold by the "small-time crooks" of the 
Stock Exchange in the hope of a "future resurrection brought to pass by the day's 
market cpaotations." Julius Rodenberg, Paris bei Sonnenschein und Lampenlicht 
(Berlin, 1867), pp. 102-103. [C2a,l] 

Conservative tendency of Parisian life: as late as 1867, an entrepreneur conceived 
the plan of having fi ve hundred sedan chairs circulate throughout the city. 

[C2a,2] 



Concerning the mythological topography of Paris : the character given it by its 
gates. Important is their duality: border gates and triumphal arches. Mystery of 



the boundary stone which, although located in the heart of the city, once marked 
the point at which it ended. — On the other hand, the Arc de Triomphe, which 
today has become a traffic island. Out of the field of experience proper to the 
threshold evolved the gateway that transforms whoever passes under its arch. 
The Roman victory arch makes the returning general a conquering hero. (Ab- 
surdity of the relief on the inner wall of the arch? A classicist misunderstanding?) 

[C2a,3] 

The gallery that leads to the Mothers 5 is made of wood. Likewise, in the large- 
scale renovations of the urban scene, wood plays a constant though ever- 
shifting role: amid the modern traffic, it fashions, in the wooden palings and in 
the wooden planking over open substructions, the image of its rustic prehistory. 
OlronO [C2a,4] 

"It is the obscurely rising dream of northerly streets in a big city — not only Paris, 
perhaps, but also Berlin and the largely unknown London — obscurely rising, in a 
rainless twilight that is nonetheless damp. The streets grow narrow and the houses 
right and left draw closer together; ultimately it becomes an arcade with grimy 
shop windows, a gallery of glass. To the right and left: Are those dirty bistros, with 
waitresses lurking in black-and-white silk blouses? It stinks of cheap wine. Or is it 
the garish vestibule of a bordello? As I advance a little further, however, I see on 
both sides small summer-green doors and the rustic window shutters they call 
volets. Sitting there, little old ladies are spinning, and through the windows by the 
somewhat rigid flowering plant, as though in a country garden, I see a fair-skinned 
young lady in a gracious apartment, and she sings: 'Someone is spinning 
silk. . . ."' Franz Hessel, manuscript. Compare Strindherg, "The Pilot's Trials.'"' 

[C2a,5] 

At the entrance, a mailbox: last opportunity to make some sign to the world one 
is leaving. [C2a,6] 

Underground sightseeing in the sewers. Preferred route: Chatelet-Madeleine. 

[C2a,7] 



"The ruins of the Church and of the aristocracy, of feudalism, of the Middle Ages, 
are sublime — they fill the wide-eyed victors of today with admiration. But the 
ruins of the bourgeoisie will be an ignoble detritus of pasteboard, plaster, and 
coloring." <Honore de Balzac and other authors,) Le Diable a Paris (Paris, 1845), 
vol. 2, p. 18 (Balzac, "Ce qui disparait de Paris"). D Collector D [C2a,8] 

... All this, in our eyes, is what the arcades are. And they were nothing of all this. 
"It is only today, when the pickaxe menaces them, that they have at last become 
the true sanctuaries of a cult of the ephemeral, the ghostly landscape of danmable 
pleasures and professions. Places that yesterday were incomprehensible, and that 
tomorrow will never know." Louis Aragon, Le Paysan de Paris (Paris, 1926), 
p. 19. 7 0 Collector 0 [C2a,9] 



Sudden past of a city: windows lit up in expectation of Christmas shine as though 
their lights have been burning since 1880. [C2a,10] 



The dream — it is the earth in which the find is made that testifies to the primal 
history of the nineteenth century. D Dream D [C2a, 1 1 ] 

Reasons for the decline of the arcades: widened sidewalks, electric light, ban on 
prostitution, culture of the open air. [C2a,12] 



The rebirth of the archaic drama of the Greeks in the booths of the trade fair. 
The prefect of police allows only dialogue on this stage. "This third character is 
mute, by order of Monsieur the Prefect of Police, who permits only dialogue in 
theaters designated as nonresident." Gerard de Nerval, Le Cabaret de la Mere 
Saguet (Paris <1927>), pp. 259-260 ("Le Boulevard du Temple autrefois et 
aujourd'hui"). [C3,l] 



At the entrance to the arcade, a mailbox: a last opportunity to make some sign to 
the world one is leaving. [C3,2] 

The city is only apparently homogeneous. Even its name takes on a different 
sound from one district to the next. Nowhere, unless perhaps in dreams, can the 
phenomenon of the boundary be experienced in a more originary way than in 
cities. To know them means to understand those lines that, running alongside 
railroad crossings and across privately owned lots, within the park and along the 
riverbank, function as limits; it means to know these confines, together with the 
enclaves of the various districts. As threshold, the boundary stretches across 
streets; a new precinct begins like a step into the void — as though one had 
unexpectedly cleared a low step on a flight of stairs. [C3,3] 



At the entrance to the arcade, to the skating rink, to the pub, to the tennis court: 
penates. The hen that lays the golden praline-eggs, the machine that stamps our 
names on nameplates and the other machine that weighs us (the modern gnothi 
seauton)* slot machines, the mechanical fortuneteller — these guard the threshold. 
They are generally found, it is worth noting, neither on the inside nor truly in the 
open. They protect and mark the transitions; and when one seeks out a little 
greenery on a Sunday afternoon, one is turning to these mysterious penates as 
well. D Dream House D Love D [C3 ,4] 



The despotic terror of die hand bell, the terror that reigns throughout the apart- 
ment, derives its force no less from the magic of the threshold. Some things shrill 
as they are about to cross a threshold. But it is strange how the ringing becomes 
melancholy, like a knell, when it heralds departure — as in the Kaiserpanorama, 
when it starts up with the slight tremor of the receding image and announces 
another to come. D Dream House D Love D [C3,5] 



These gateways — the entrances to the arcades — are thresholds. No stone step <g 
serves to mark them. But this marking is accomplished by the expectant posture 

of the handful of people. Tightly measured paces reflect the fact, altogether ft 

unknowingly, that a decision lies ahead. D Dream House D Love D [C3,6] §" 

I' 

Other courts of miracles besides the one in the Passage du Caire that is celebrated 1-3 

in Notre-Dame de Paris <The Hunchback of Notre Dame.) "In the old Paris neigh- §■ 

borhood of the Marais, on the Rue des Tournelles, are the Passage and the Cour O 

des Miracles. There were other cours des miracles on the Rue Saint-Denis, the Rue p> 

du Bac, the Rue de Neuilly, the Rue des Coquilles, the Rue de la Jussienne, the 2 

Rue Saint-Nicaise, and the promontory of Saint-Roch.' <Emile de> Labedolliere, ™ 

Histoire <des environs> du nouveau Paris (Paris <1861?>), p. 31. [The biblical |? 

passages after which these courts were named: Isaiah 26.4-5 and 27.] [C3,7] o, 

I 

In reference to Haussmann's successes with the water supply and the drainage of ~ 
Paris: "The poets would say that Haussmann was inspired more by the divinities £$ 
below than by the gods above." Lucien Dubech and Pierre d'Espezel, Histoire de | 
Paris (Paris, 1926), p. 418. [C3,8] S, 

Metro. "A great many of the stations have been given absurd names. The worst 
seems to belong to the one at the corner of the Rue Breguet and the Rue Saint- 
Sabin, which ultimately joined together, in the abbreviation 'Breguet-Sabin,' the 
name of a watchmaker and the name of a saint." Dubech and d'Espezel, Histoire 
de Paris, p. 463. [C3,9] 

Wood an archaic element in street construction: wooden barricades. [C3,10] 

June Insurrection. "Most of the prisoners were transferred via the quarries and 
subterranean passages which are located under the forts of Paris, and which are so 
extensive that half the population of the city could be contained there. The cold in 
these underground corridors is so intense that many had to run continually or 
move their arms about to keep from freezing, and no one dared to lie down on the 
cold stones. . . . The prisoners gave all the passages names of Paris streets, and 
whenever they met one another, they exchanged addresses." Englander, 
<Geschichte der franzbsischen Arbeiter-Associationen (Hamburg, 1864')>, vol. 2, 
pp. 314-315. [C3a,l] 

"The Paris stone quarries are all interconnected. ... In several places pillars have 
been set up so that the roof does not cave in. In other places the walls have been 
reinforced. These walls form long passages under the earth, like narrow streets. 
On several of them, at the end, numbers have been inscribed to prevent wrong 
turns, but without a guide one is not . . . likely to venture into these exhausted 
seams of limestone ... if one does not wish ... to risk starvation." — "The legend 
according to which one can see the stars by day from the tunnels of the Paris 
quarries" originated in an old mine shaft "that was covered over on the surface by 



a stone slab in which there is a small hole some six millimeters in diameter. 
Through this hole, the daylight shines into the gloom helow like a pale star." J . F. 
Benzenberg, Briefe geschrieben auf einer Reise nach Paris (Dortmund, 1805), 
vol. 1 , pp. 207-208. [C3a,2] 

"A thing which smoked and clacked on the Seine, making the noise of a swimming 
dog, went and came beneath the windows of the Tuileries, from the Pont Royal to 
the Pont Louis XV; it was a piece of mechanism of no great value, a sort of toy, the 
daydream of a visionary, a Utopia — a steamboat. The Parisians looked upon the 
useless thing with indifference." Victor Hugo, Les Miserables, part l, 9 cited in 
Nadar, Quand j'etais photographe (Paris <1900>), p. 280. [C3a,3] 

"As if an enchanter or a stage manager, at the first peal of the whistle from the first 
locomotive, gave a signal to all things to awake and take flight." Nadar, Quand 
j'etais photographe (Paris), p. 281. [C3a,4] 

Characteristic is the birth of one of the great documentary works on Paris — 
namely, Maxime Du Camp's Paris: Ses organes, ses fonctions et sa vie dans la 
seconde moitie du XIX' siecle, in six volumes (Paris, 1893-1896). About this book, 
the catalogue of a secondhand bookshop says: "It is of great interest for its 
documentation, which is as exact as it is minute. Du Camp, in fact, has not been 
averse to trying his hand at all sorts of jobs — performing the role of omnibus 
conductor, street sweeper, and sewennan — in order to gather materials for his 
book. His tenacity has won him the nickname 'Prefect of the Seine in partibus,' 
and it was not irrelevant to his elevation to the office of senator." Paul Bourget 
describes the genesis of the book in his "Discours academique du 13 juin 1895: 
Succession a Maxime Du Camp" (Anthologie de V Academe Frmcaue [Paris, 1921], 
vol. 2, pp. 191-193). In 1862, recounts Bourget, after experiencing problems 
with his vision, Du Camp went to see the optician Secretan, who prescribed a 
pair of spectacles for farsightedness. Here is Du Camp: "Age has gotten to me. I 
have not given it a friendly welcome. But I have submitted. I have ordered a 
lorgnon and a pair of spectacles." Now Bourget: "The optician did not have the 
prescribed glasses on hand. He needed a half hour to prepare them. M. Maxime 
Du Camp went out to pass this half hour strolling about the neighborhood. He 
found himself on the Pont Neuf . ... It was, for the writer, one of those moments 
when a man who is about to leave youth behind thinks of life with a resigned 
gravity that leads him to find in all things the image of his own melancholy. The 
minor physiological decline which his visit to the optician had just confirmed put 
him in mind of what is so quickly forgotten: that law of inevitable destruction 

which governs everything human Suddenly he began — he, the voyager to the 

Orient, the sojourner through mute and weary wastes where the sand consists of 
dust of the dead — to envision a day when this town, too, whose enormous breath 
now filled his senses, would itself be dead, as so many capitals of so many 
empires were dead. The idea came to him that it would be extraordinarily inter- 
esting for us to have an exact and complete picture of an Athens at the time of 



Pericles, of a Carthage at the time of Barca, of an Alexandria at the time of the 
Ptolemies, of a Rome at the time of the Caesars. ... By one of those keen 
intuitions with which a magnificent subject for a work flashes before the mind, he 
clearly perceived the possibility of writing about Paris this book which the histo- 
rians of antiquity had failed to write about their towns. He regarded anew the 
spectacle of the bridge, the Seine, and the quay. . . . The work of his mature years 
had announced itself." It is highly characteristic that the modern administrative- 
technical work on Paris should be inspired by classical history. Compare further, 
concerning the decline of Paris, Leon Daudet's chapter on Sacre Coeur in his 
Paris vecu Experiences of Parisx 10 [C4] 

The following remarkable sentence from the bravura piece "Paris souterrain," in 
Nadar's Quand j'etais photographe: "In his history of sewers, written with the 
genial pen of the poet and philosopher, Hugo mentions at one point (after a de- 
scription that he has made more stirring than a drama) that, in China, not a single 
peasant returns home, after selling his vegetables in the city, without bearing the 
heavy load of an enormous bucket filled with precious fertilizer" (p. 124). 

[C4a,l] 

Apropos of the gates of Paris: "Until the moment you saw the toll collector appear 
between two columns, you could imagine yourself before the gates of Rome or of 
Athens." Biographie universelle ancienne et moderne, new edition published un- 
der the direction of M. Michaud, vol. 14 (Paris, 1856), p . 321 (article by P. F. L. 
Fontaine). [C4a,2] 

"In a book by Theophile Gautier, Caprices et zigzags, I find a curious page. 'A 
great danger threatens us,' it says. 'The modern Babylon will not be smashed like 
the tower of Lylak; it will not be lost in a sea of asphalt like Pentapolis, or buried 
under the sand like Thebes. It will simply be depopulated and ravaged by the rats 
of Montfaucon.' Extraordinary vision of a vague but prophetic dreamer! And it 
has in essence proven true. . . . The rats of Montfaucon . . . have not endangered 
Paris; Haussmann's arts of embellishment have driven them off. . . . But from the 
heights of Montfaucon the proletariat have descended, and with gunpowder and 
petroleum they have begun the destruction of Paris which Gautier foresaw." Max 
Nordau, Aus dem wahren Milliardenlan.de: Pariser Studien und Bilder (Leipzig, 
1878), vol. 1, pp. 75-76 ("Belleville"). [C4a,3] 

In 1899, during work on the Metro, foundations of a tower of the Bastille were 
discovered on the Rue Saint-Antoine. Cabinet des Estampes. [C4a,4] 

Halls of wine: "The warehouse, which consists partly of vaults for the spirits and 
partly of wine cellars dug out of stone, forms . . ., as it were, a city in which the 
streets bear the names of the most important wine regions of France. " Acht Tmge in 
Paris (Paris, July 1855), pp. 37-38. [C4a,5] 



5 "The cellars of the Cafe Anglais . . . extend quite a distance under the boulevards, 
~~ forming the most complicated denies. The management took the trouble to divide 
■ g them into streets. . . . You have the Rue du Bourgogne, the Rue du Bordeaux, the 
B« Rue du Beaune, the Rue de l'Ermitaae, the Rue du Chambertin, the crossroads of 

° ... Tonneaux. You come to a cool grotto . . . filled with shellfish . . . ; it is the 

■M grotto for the wines of Champagne. . . . The great lords of bygone days conceived 

Q the idea of dining in their stables. . . . But if you want to dine in a really eccentric 

§ fashion: vivent les caves!'''' Taxile Delord, Paris-viveur (Paris, 1854), pp. 79-81, 

| 83-84. [C4 a ,6] 
1 

^ "Rest assured that when Hugo saw a beggar on the road, ... he saw him for what 

■g he is, for what he really is in reality: the ancient mendicant, the ancient suppli- 

8 cant, ... on the ancient road. When he looked at a marble slab on one of our 

3 

^ mantlepieces, or a cemented brick in one of our modern chimneys, he saw it for 

m what it is: the stone of the hearth. The ancient hearthstone. When he looked at a 

6 door to the street, and at a doorstep, which is usually of cut stone, he distinguished 
g clearly on this stone the ancient line, the sacred threshold, for it is one and the 
■:i same line." Charles Peguy, Oeuvres completes, 1873-1914: Oeuvres de prose 

y (Paris, 1916), pp. 388-389 ("Victor-Marie, Comte Hugo"). [C5,l] 

"The wine shops of the Faubourg Antoine resemble those taverns on Mount 
Aventine, above the Sibyl's cave, which communicated with the deep and sacred 
afflatus; taverns whose tables were almost tripods, and where men drank what 
Ennius calls 'the sibylline wine." 1 Victor Hugo, Oeuvres completes, novels, vol. 8 
(Paris, 1881), pp. 55-56 (Les Miserables, part 4)." [C5,2] 



"Those who have traveled in Sicily will remember the celebrated convent where, 
as a result of the earth's capacity for drying and preserving bodies, the monks at a 
certain time of year can deck out in their ancient regalia all the grandees to whom 
they have accorded the hospitality of the grave: ministers, popes, cardinals, war- 
riors, and kings. Placing them in two rows within their spacious catacombs, they 
allow the public to pass between these rows of skeletons. . . . Well, this Sicilian 
convent gives us an image of our society. Under the pompous garb that adorns our 
art and literature, no heart beats — there are only dead men, who gaze at you with 
staring eyes, lusterless and cold, when you ask the century where the inspiration 
is, where the arts, where the literature." <Alfred> Nettement, Les Ruines morales 
et intellectuelles (Paris, October 1836), p. 32. This may be compared with Hugo's 
"A 1' Arc de Triomphe" of 1837. [C5,3] 



The last two chapters of Leo Claretie's Paris depiris ses origines jusqu'enl'an3000 
(Paris, 1886) are entitled "The Ruins of Paris" and "The Year 3000." The first 
contains a paraphrase of Victor Hugo's verses on the Arc de Triomphe. The second 
reproduces a lecture on the antiquities of Paris that are preserved in the famous 
"Academie de Floksima . . . located in La Cenepire. This is a new continent . . . 



discovered between Cape Horn and the southern territories in the year 2500" 
(p. 347). [C5,4] 



"There was, at the Chatelet de Paris, a broad long cellar. This cellar was eight feet 
deep below the level of the Seine. It had neither windows nor ventilators . . . ; men 
could enter, but air could not. The cellar had for a ceiling a stone arch, and for a 
floor, ten inches of mud. . . . Eight feet above the floor, a long massive beam 
crossed this vaultf rom side to side; from this beam there hung, at intervals, chains 
. . . and at the end of these chains there were iron collars. Men condemned to the 
galleys were put into this cellar until the day of their departure for Toulon. They 
were pushed under this timber, where each had his iron swinging in the darkness, 
waiting for him. ... In order to eat, they had to draw their bread, which was 
thrown into the mire, up their leg with their heel, within reach of their hand. . . . 
In this hell-sepulcher, what did they do? What can be done in a sepulcher: they 
agonized. And what can be done in a hell: they sang. ... In this cellar, almost all 
the argot songs were born. It is from the dungeon of the Grand Chatelet de Paris 
that the melancholy galley refrain of Montgomery comes: 'Timaloumisaine, timou- 
lamison.' Most of these songs are dreary; some are cheerful." Victor Hugo, 
Oeuvres completes novels, vol. 8 (Paris, 1881), pp. 297—298 (Les Miserables). 1 ' 1 
D Subterranean Paris D [C5a,l] 

On the theory of thresholds: '"Between those who go on foot in Paris and those 
who go by carriage, the only difference is the running board,' as a peripatetic 
philosopher has said. Ah, the running board! ... It is the point of departure from 
one country to another, from misery to luxury, from thoughtlessness to thoughtful- 
ness. It is the hyphen between him who is nothing and him who is all. The question 
is: where to put one's foot." Theophile Gautier, Etudes philosophiques: Paris et les 
Parisiens au XIX" siecle (Paris, 1856), p. 26. [C5a,2] 

Slight foreshadowing of the Metro in this description of model houses of the future: 
"The basements, very spacious and well lit, are all connected, forming long galler- 
ies which follow the course of the streets. Here an underground railroad has heen 
built — not for human travelers, to be sure, hut exclusively for cumbersome mer- 
chandise, for wine, wood, coal, and so forth, which it delivers to the interior of the 
home. . . . These underground trains acquire a steadily growing importance." 
Tony Moilin, Paris en Van 2000 (Paris, 1869), pp. 14-15 ("Maisons-modeles"). 

[C5a,3] 

Fragments from Victor Hugo's ode "A I 'Arc de Triomphe": 

II 

Always Paris cries and mutters. 
Who can tell — unfathomable question — 
What would be lost from the universal clamor 
On the day that Paris fell silent! 



Ill 

Silent it will be nonetheless! — After so many dawns, 

So many months and years, so many played-out centuries, 

When this bank, where the stream breaks against the echoing bridges, 

Is returned to the modest and murmuring reeds; 

When the Seine shall flee the obstructing stones, 
Consuming some old dome collapsed into its depths, 
Heedful of the gentle breeze that carries to the clouds 
The rustling of the leaves and the song of birds; 

When it shall flow, at night, pale in the darkness, 
Happy, in the drowsing of its long-troubled course, 
To listen at last to the countless voices 
Passing indistinctly beneath the starry sky; 

When this city, mad and churlish ouvrisre, 
That hastens the fate reserved for its walls, 
And, turning to dust under the blows of its hammer, 
Converts bronze to coins and marble to flagstones; 

When the roofs, the bells, the tortuous hives, 
Porches, pediments, arches full of pride 
That make up this city, many-voiced and tumultuous, 
Stilling, inextricable, and teeming to the eye, 

When from the wide plain all these things have passed, 
And nothing remains of pyramid and pantheon 
But two granite towers built by Charlemagne 
And a bronze column raised by Napoleon, 

You, then, will complete the sublime triangle! 



IV 

Thus, arch, you will loom eternal and intact 
When all that the Seine now mirrors in its surface 

Will have vanished forever, 
When of that city — the equal, yes, of Rome — 
Nothing will be left except an angel, an eagle, a man 

Surmounting three summits! 



V 

No, time takes nothing away from things. 
More than one portico wrongly vaunted 
In its protracted metamorphoses 
Comes to beauty in the end. 
On the monuments we revere 
Time casts a somber spell, 
Stretching from f agade to apse. 
Never, though it cracks and rusts, 



Is the robe which time peels from them 
Worth the one it puts back on. 



to 



It is time who chisels a groove 

In an indigent arch-stone; 

Who rubs his knowing thumb 

On the corner of a barren marble slab; 

It is he who, in correcting the work, 

Introduces a living snake 

Midst the knots of a granite hydra. 

I think I see a Gothic roof start laughing 

When, from its ancient frieze, 

Time removes a stone and puts in a nest. 



VIII 



No, everything will be dead. Nothing left in this campagna 

But a vanished population, still around, 

But the dull eye of man and the living eye of God, 

But an arch, and a column, and there, in the middle 

Of this silver ed-over river, still afoam, 

A church half -stranded in the mist. 

February 2, 1837. 

Victor Hugo, Oeuvres completes, Poetry, vol. 3 (Paris, 1880), pp. 233-245. 

[C6; C6a,l] 



Demolition sites: sources for teaching the theory of construction. "Never have 
circumstances been more favorable for this genre of study than the epoch we live 
in today. During the past twelve years, a multitude of buildings — among them, 
churches and cloisters — have been demolished down to the first layers of their 
foundations; they have all provided . . . useful instruction." Charles-Francois 
Viel, De V Impuissan.ee des mathematiques pour assurer la solidite des batimens 
(Paris, 1805), pp. 43-44. [C6a,2] 



Demolition sites: "The high walls, with their bister-colored lines around the chim- 
ney flues, reveal, like the cross-section of an architectural plan, the mystery of 
intimate distributions. ... A curious spectacle, these open houses, with their 
floorboards suspended over the abyss, their colorful flowered wallpaper still 
showing the shape of the rooms, their staircases leading nowhere now, their cellars 
open to the sky, their bizarre collapsed interiors and battered ruins. It all resem- 
bles, though without the gloomy tone, those uninhabitable structures which Pira- 
nesi outlined with such feverish intensity in his etchings." Theophile Gautier, 
Mosa'ique de mines: Paris et les Parisiens au XIX e siecle, by Alexandre Dumas, 
Theophile Gautier, Arsene Houssaye, Paul de Musset, Louis Enault, and Du Fayl 
(Paris, 1856), pp. 38-39. [C7,l] 



Conclusion of <Louis> Lurine's article "Les Boulevards": "The boulevards will die 
of an aneurism: the explosion of gas." Paris chez soi (Paris <1854>), p. 62 (anthol- 
ogy issued by Paul Boizard). [C7,2] 



Baudelaire to Poulet-Malassis on January 8, 1860, concerning Mer yon: "In one of 
his large plates, he substituted for a little balloon a cloud of predatory birds, and 
when I pointed out to him that it was implausible that so many eagles could be 
found in a Parisian sky, he answered that it was not without a basis in fact, since 
'those men' (the emperor's government) had often released eagles to study the 
presages according to the rites, and that this had been reported in the newspa- 
pers — even in Le Moniteiir. ,m Cited in Gustave Geffroy, Charles Meryon (Paris, 



On the triumphal arch: "The triumph was an institution of the Roman state and 
was conditioned on the possession of the field-commander's right — the right of the 
military imperium — which, however, was extinguished on the day of the tri- 
umph. ... Of the various provisions attaching to the right of triumph, the most 
important was that the territorial hounds of the city . . . were not to be crossed 
prematurely. Otherwise the commander would forfeit the rights of the auspices of 
war — which held only for operations conducted outside the city — and with them 
the claim to triumph. . . . Every defilement, all guilt for the murderous battle (and 
perhaps originally tliis included the danger posed by the spirits of the slain), is 
removed from the commander and the army; it remains . . . outside the sacred 
gateway. . . . Such a conception makes it clear . . . that the porta triumphalis was 
nothing less than a monument for the glorification of victory." Ferdinand Noack, 
Triumph und Triumphbogen, Warburg Library Lectures, vol. 5 (Leipzig, 1928), 



"Edgar Poe created a character who wanders the streets of capital cities; he called 
him the Man of the Crowd. The restlessly inquiring engraver is the Man of 
Stones. . . . Here we have . . . an . . . artist who did not study and draw, like 
Piranesi, the remnants of a bygone existence, yet whose work gives one the sensa- 
tion of persistent nostalgia. . . . This is Charles Meryon. His work as an engraver 
represents one of the profoundest poems ever written about a city, and what is 
truly original in all these striking pictures is that they seem to be the image, despite 
being drawn directly from life, of things that are finished, that are dead or about to 
die. . . . This impression exists independently of the most scrupulous and realistic 
reproduction of subjects chosen by the artist. There was something of the vision- 
ary in Meryon, and he undoubtedly divined that these rigid and unyielding forms 
were ephemeral, that these singular beauties were going the way of all flesh. He 
listened to the language spoken by streets and alleys that, since the earliest days of 
the city, were being continually torn up and redone; and that is why his evocative 
poetry makes contact with the Middle Ages through the nineteenth-century city, 
why it radiates eternal melancholy through the vision of immediate appearances. 
"OW Paris is gone (no human heart / changes half so f ast as a city's face). " I4 These 



1926), pp. 126-127. 



[C7,3] 



pp. 150-151, 154. 



[C7,4] 



two lines by Baudelaire could serve as an epigraph to Meryon's entire oeuvre." 
Gustave Geffroy, Charles Meryon (Paris, 1926), pp. 1-3. [C7a,l] 



"There is no need to imagine that the ancient porta triumphalis was already an 
arched gateway. On the contrary, since it served an entirely symbolic act, it would 
originally have been erected by the simplest of means — namely, two posts and a 
straight lintel." Ferdinand Noack, Triumph und Triumphbogen, Warburg Library 
Lectures, vol. 5 (Leipzig, 1928), p. 168. [C7a,2] 

The march through the triumphal arch as rite de passage: "The march of the 
troops through the narrow gateway has been compared to a 'rigorous passage 
through a narrow opening,' something to which the significance of a rebirth at- 
taches." Ferdinand Noack, Triumph und Triumphbogen, Warburg Library Lec- 
tures, vol. 5 (Leipzig, 1928), p. 153. [C7a,3] 

The fantasies of the decline of Paris are a symptom of the fact that technology 
was not accepted. These visions bespeak the gloomy awareness that along 
with the great cities have evolved the means to raze them to the ground. 

[C7a,4] 

Noack mentions "that Scipio's arch stood not above but opposite the road that 
leads up to the Capitol (adversus viam, qua in Capitolium ascenditur). . . . We 
are thus given insight into the purely monumental character of these structures, 
which are without any practical meaning." On the other hand, the cultic sig- 
nificance of these structures emerges as clearly in their relation to special occa- 
sions as in their isolation: "And there, where many . . . later arches stand — at the 
beginning and end of the street, in the vicinity of bridges, at the entrance to the 
forum, at the city limit — there was operative for the . . . Romans a conception of 
the sacred as boundary or threshold." Ferdinand Noack, Triumph und Tri- 
umphbogen, Warburg Library Lectures, vol. 5 (Leipzig, 1928), pp. 162, 169. 

[C8,lj 

Apropos of the hicycle: "Actually one should not deceive oneself about the real 
purpose of the fashionable new mount, which a poet the other day referred to as 
the horse of the Apocalypse." U Illustration, June 12, 1869, cited in Vendredi, 
October 9, 1936 (Louis Cheronnet, "Le Coin des vieux"). [C8,2] 

Concerning the fire that destroyed the hippodrome: "The gossips of the district see 
in this disaster a visitation of the wrath of heaven on the guilty spectacle of the 
velocipedes." Le Gaulois, October 2 (3?), 1869, cited in Vendredi, October 9, 1936 
( Louis Cheronnet, "Le Coin des vieux"). The hippodrome was the site of ladies' 
hicycle races. [C8,3] 

To elucidate Les Mysteres de Paris and similar works, Caillois refers to the roman 
noir, in particular The Mysteries of Udolpho, on account of the "preponder- 



ance of vaults and underground passages." Roger Caillois, "Paris, mythe 
moderne," Nouvelle Revue francaise, 25, no. 284 (May 1, 1937), p. 686. 

[CM] 

"The whole of the rive gauche, all the way from the Tour de Nesle to the Tombe 
Issoire . . . , is nothing but a hatchway leading from the surface to the depths. And 
if the modern demolitions reveal the mysteries of the upper world of Paris, per- 
haps one day the inhabitants of the Left Bank will awaken startled to discover the 
mysteries below." Alexandre Dumas, Les Mohicans tie Paris, vol. 3 (Paris, 1863). 

[C8.5] 

"This intelligence of Blanqui's, . . . this tactic of silence, this politics of the cata- 
combs, must have made Barbes hesitate occasionally, as though confronted with 
... an unexpected stairway that suddenly gapes and plunges to the cellar in an 
unfamiliar house." Gustave Geffroy, L'Enferme (Paris, 1926), vol. 1, p. 72. 

[C8,6] 

<Regis> Messac (<in he "Detective Novel" et Vinfluence de la pensee scientifique 
[Paris, 1929], > p. 419) quotes from Vidocq's Memoires (chapter 45): "Paris is a 
spot on the globe, but this spot is a sewer and the emptying point of all sewers." 

[C8a,l] 

Le Panorama (a literary and critical revue appearing five times weekly), in vol- 
ume 1, number 3 (its last number), February 25, 1840, under the title "Difficult 
Questions": "Will the universe end tomorrow? Or must it — enduring for all 
eternity — see the end of our planet? Or will this planet, which has the honor of 
bearing us, outlast all the other worlds?" Very characteristic that one could write 
this way in a literary revue. (In the first number, "To Our Readers," it is acknowl- 
edged, furthermore, that Le Panorama was founded to make money.) The 
founder was the vaudevillian Hippolyte Lucas. [C8a,2] 

Saint who each night led back 

The entire flock to the fold, diligent shepherdess, 

When the world and Paris come to the end of their term, 

May you, with a firm step and a light hand, 

Through the last yard and the last portal, 

Lead back, through the vault and the folding door, 

The entire flock to the right hand of the Father. 

Charles Peguy, La Tapisserie de Sainte-Genevieve, cited in Marcel Raymond, De 
Baudelaire au Surrealisme (Paris, 1933), p. 219. 15 [C8a,3] 

Distrust of cloisters and clergy during the Commune: "Even more than with the 
incident of the Rue Picpus, everything possible was done to excite the popular 
imagination, thanks to the vaults of Saint-Laurent. To the voice of the press was 



added publicizing through images. Etienne Carjat photographed the skeletons, <§ 

'with the aid of electric light.' . . . After Picpus, after Saint-Laurent, at an interval -- 

of some days, the Convent of the Assumption and the Church of Notre-Dame-des- {"} 

Victoires. A wave of madness overtook the capital. Everywhere people thought §* 

they were finding buried vaults and skeletons." Georges Laronze, Histoire de la g' 

Commune de 1871 (Paris, 1928), p. 370. [C8a,4] ^ 

1871: "The popular imagination could give itself free reign, and it took every o 

opportunity to do so. There wasn't one civil-service official who did not seek to g 

expose the method of treachery then in fashion: the subterranean method. In the 8 

prison of Saint-Lazare, they searched for the underground passage which was said - 

to lead from the chapel to Argenteuil — that is, to cross two branches of the Seine <? 

and some ten kilometers as the crow fl ies. At Saint-Sulpice, the passage supposedly o, 

abutted the chateau of Versailles." Georges Laronze, Histoire de la Commune de £>' 
1871 (Paris, 1928), p. 399. [C8a,5] 

"As a matter of fact, men had indeed replaced the prehistoric water. Many centu- [f 
ries after it had withdrawn, they had begun a similar overflowing. They had S, 
spread themselves in the same hollows, pushed out in the same directions. It was 
down there — toward Saint-Merri, the Temple, the Hotel de Ville, toward Les 
Halles, the Cemetery of the Innocents, and the Opera, in the places where water 
had found the greatest difficulty escaping, places which had kept oozing with 
infiltrations, with subterranean streams — that men, too, had most completely 
saturated the soil. The most densely populated and busiest quartiers still lay over 
what had once been marsh." Jules Romains, Les Hommes de bonne volonte, book 
1, he 6 octobre (Paris <1932>), p. 191. 16 [C9,l] 

Baudelaire and the cemeteries: "Behind the high walls of the houses, toward Mont- 
martre, toward Menilmontant, toward Montparnasse, he imagines at dusk the 
cemeteries of Paris, these three other cities within the larger one — cities smaller in 
appearance than the city of the living, which seems to contain them, but in reality 
how much more populous, with their closely packed little compartments arranged 
in tiers under the ground. And in the same places where the crowd circulates 
today — the Square des Innocents, for example — he evokes the ancient ossuaries, 
now leveled or entirely gone, swallowed up in the sea of time with all their dead, 
like ships that have sunk with all their crew aboard." Francois Porche, La Vie 
douloureuse de Charles Baudelaire, in series entitled Le Roman des Grandes 
Existences, no. 6 (Paris <1926>), pp. 186-187. [C9,2] 

Parallel passage to the ode on the Arc de Triomphe. Humanity is apostrophized: 

As for your cities, Babels of monuments 
Where all events clamor at once, 

How substantial are they? Arches, towers, pyramids — 
I would not be surprised if, in its humid incandescence, 
The dawn one morning suddenly dissolved them, 



Along with the dewdrops on sage and thyme. 
And all your noble dwellings, many-tiered, 
End up as heaps of stone and grass 
Where, in the sunlight, the subtle serpent hisses. 



Victor Hugo, La Fin de Satan; Dieu (Paris, 1911), pp. 475-476 ("Dieu-L'Ange"). 

[C9.3] 



Leon Daudet on the view of Paris from Sacre Coeur. "From high up you can see 
this population of palaces, monuments, houses, and hovels, which seem to have 
gathered in expectation of some cataclysm, or of several cataclysms — meteorologi- 
cal, perhaps, or social. ... As a lover of hilltop sanctuaries, which never fail to 
stimulate my mind and nerves with their bracing harsh wind, I have spent hours 
on Fourvieres looking at Lyons, on Notre-Dame de la Garde looking at Marseilles, 
on Sacre Coeur looking at Paris. . . . And, yes, at a certain moment I heard in 
myself something like a tocsin, a strange admonition, and I saw these three mag- 
nificent cities . . . threatened with collapse, with devastation by fire and flood, with 
carnage, with rapid erosion, like forests leveled en bloc. At other times, I saw them 
preyed upon by an obscure, subterranean evil, which undermined the monuments 
and neighborhoods, causing entire sections of the proudest homes to crumble. . . . 
From the standpoint of these promontories, what appears most clearly is the men- 
ace. The agglomeration is menacing; the enormous labor is menacing. For man has 
need of labor, that is clear, but he has other needs as well. . . . He needs to isolate 
himself and to form groups, to cry out and to revolt, to regain cabn and to sub- 
mit. . . . Finally, the need for suicide is in him; and in the society he forms, it is 
stronger than the instinct for self-preservation. Hence, as one looks out over 
Paris, Lyons, or Marseilles, from the heights of Sacre Coeur, the Fourvieres, or 
Notre-Dame de la Garde, what astounds one is that Paris, Lyons, and Marseilles 
have endured." Leon Daudet, Paris vecu, vol. 1, Rive droite (Paris <1930>), 



"In a long series of classical writers from Polybius onward, we read of old, re- 
nowned cities in which the streets have become lines of empty, crumbling shells, 
where the cattle browse in forum and gymnasium, and the amphitheater is a sown 
field, dotted with emergent statues and herms. Rome had in the fifth century of our 
era the population of a village, but its imperial palaces were still habitable." 
Oswald Spengler, LeDeclin tie VOccident <trans. M. Tazerout), vol. 2, pt. 1 (Paris, 



pp. 220-221. 



[C9a,l] 



1933), p. 151. 17 



[C9a,2]