[Boredom, Eternal Return] 



Must the sun therefore murder all dreams, 
the pale children of my pleasure grounds? 
The days have grown so still and glowering. 
Satisfaction lures me with nebulous visions, 
while dread makes away with my salvation — 
as though I were about to judge my God. 

—Jakob van Hoddis' 

Boredom waits for death. 
— Johann Peter HebeP 

Waiting is life. 
— Victor Hugo 3 



Child with its mother in the panorama. The panorama is presenting the Battle 
of Sedan. The child finds it all very lovely: "Only, it's too bad the sky is so 
dreary." — "That's what the weather is like in war," answers the mother. D Dio- 
ramas D 

Thus, the panoramas too are in fundamental complicity with this world of 
mist, this cloud-world: the light of their images breaks as through curtains of rain. 

[Dl.l] 

"This Paris [of Baudelaire's] is very different from the Paris of Verlaine, which 
itself has already faded. The one is somber and rainy, like a Paris on which the 
image of Lyons has been superimposed; the other is whitish and dusty, like a pastel 
by Raphael. One is suffocating, whereas the other is airy, with new buildings 
scattered in a wasteland, and, not far away, a gate leading to withered arbors." 
Francois Porche, La Vie doidoureuse de Charles Baudelaire (Paris, 1926), p. 119. 

[Dl,2] 

The mere narcotizing effect which cosmic forces have on a shallow and brittle 
personality is attested in the relation of such a person to one of the highest and 
most genial manifestations of these forces: the weather. Nothing is more charac- 



teristic than that precisely this most intimate and mysterious affair, the working 
of the weather on humans, should have become the theme of their emptiest 
chatter. Nothing bores the ordinary man more than the cosmos. Hence, for him, 
the deepest connection between weather and boredom. How fine the ironic 
overcoming of this attitude in the story of the splenetic Englishman who wakes 
up one morning and shoots himself because it is raining. Or Goethe: how he 
managed to illuminate the weather in his meteorological studies, so that one is 
tempted to say he undertook this work solely in order to be able to integrate even 
the weather into his waking, creative life. [Dl,3] 

Baudelaire as the poet of Spleen de Paris: "One of the central motifs of this poetry 
is, in effect, boredom in the fog, ennui and indiscriminate haze (fog of the cities). 
In a word, it is spleen." Fran§ois Porche, La Vie douloureuse de Charles Baude- 
laire (Paris, 1926), p. 184. [Dl,4] 

In 1903, in Paris, Emile Tardieu brought out a book entitled L'Ennui, in which all 
human activity is shown to be a vain attempt to escape from boredom, but in 
which, at the same time, everything that was, is, and will be appears as the 
inexhaustible nourishment of that feeling. To hear this, you might suppose the 
work to be a mighty monument of literamre — a monument aere perennius in 
honor of the taedium uitae of the Romans.' 1 But it is only the self- satisfied shabby 
scholarship of a new Homais, who reduces all greatness, the heroism of heroes 
and the asceticism of saints, to documents of his own spiritually barren, petty- 
bourgeois discontent. [Dl,5] 

"When the French went into Italy to maintain the rights of the throne of France 
over the duchy of Milan and the kingdom of Naples, they returned home quite 
amazed at the precautions which Italian genius had taken against the excessive 
heat; and, in admiration of the arcaded galleries, they strove to imitate them. The 
rainy climate of Paris, with its celebrated mud and mire, suggested the pillars, 
which were a marvel in the old days. Here, much later on, was the impetus for the 
Place Roy ale. A strange thing! It was in keeping with the same motifs that, under 
Napoleon, the Rue de Rivoli, the Rue de Castiglione, and the famous Rue des 
Colonnes were constructed." The turban came out of Egypt in this manner as well. 
he Diable a Paris (Paris, 1845), vol. 2, pp. 11-12 (Balzac, "Ce qui disparait de 
Paris"). 

How many years separated the war mentioned above from the Napoleonic expe- 
dition to Italy? And where is the Rue des Colonnes located? 5 [Dl,6] 

"Rainshowers have given birth to <many> adventures." f ' Diminishing magical 
power of the rain. Mackintosh. [Dl,7] 

Asdust,raintakesits revenge on the arcades. — Under Louis Philippe, dust settled 
even on the revolutions. When the young due d'Orleans "married the princess of 
Mecklenburg, a great celebration was held at that famous ballroom where the 



first symptoms of the Revolution <of 1830> had broken out. When they came to 
prepare the room for the festivities of the young couple, the people in charge 
found it as the Revolution had left it. On the ground could be seen traces of the 
military banquet — candle ends, broken glasses, champagne corks, trampled 
cockades of the Gardes du Corps, and ceremonial ribbons of officers from the 
Flanders regiment." Karl Gutzkow, Briefe aus Paris (Leipzig, 1842), vol. 2, p. 87. A 
historical scene becomes a component of the panopticon. D Diorama D Dust and 
Stifled Perspective 0 [Dl a, 1] 

"He explains that the Rue Grange-Bateliere is particularly dusty, that one gets 
terribly grubby in the Rue Reaumur." Louis Aragon, Le Paysan tie Paris (Paris, 
1926), p. 88. 7 [Dla,2] 

Plush as dust collector. Mystery of dustmotes playing in the sunlight. Dust and 
the "best room." "Shortly after 1840, fully padded furniture appears in France, 
and with it the upholstered style becomes dominant." Max von Boehn, Die Mode 
im XIX. Jahrhundert, vol. 2 (Munich, 1907), p. 131. Other arrangements to stir 
up dust: the trains of dresses. "The true and proper train has recently come back 
into vogue, but in order to avoid the nuisance of having it sweep the streets, the 
wearer is now provided with a small hook and a string so that she can raise and 
carry the train whenever she goes anywhere." Friedrich Theodor Vischer, Mode 
und Zynumus (Stuttgart, 1879), p. 12. D Dust and Stifled Perspective □ [Dla,3] 

The Galerie du Thermometre and the Galeric du Barometre, in the Passage de 
l'Opera. [Dla,4] 

A feuilletonist of the 1840s, writing on the subject of the Parisian weather, has 
determined that Corneille spoke only once (in Le Cid) of the stars, and that Racine 
spoke only once of the sun. He maintains, further, that stars and flowers were first 
discovered for literature hy Chateaubriand in America and thence transplanted to 
Paris. See Victor Mery, "Le Climat de Paris," in Le Diable a Paris <vol. 1 (Paris, 
1845), p. 245>. [Dla,5] 

Concerning some lascivious pictures: "It is no longer the fan that's the thing, hut 
the umbrella — invention worthy of the epoch of the king's national guard. The 
umbrella encouraging amorous fantasies! The umhrella furnishing discreet cover. 
The canopy, the roof, over Robinson's island." John Grand -Carteret, Le 
Decollete et le retrousse (Paris <1910>), vol. 2, p. 56. [Dla,6] 

"Only here," Chirico once said, "is it possihle to paint. The streets have such 
gradations of gray. ..." [Dla,7] 



The Parisian atmosphere reminds Carus" of the way the Neapolitan coastline looks 
when the sirocco hlows. [Dla,8] 



Only someone who has grown up in the big city can appreciate its rainy weather, 
which altogether slyly sets one dreaming back to early childhood. Rain makes 
everything more hidden, makes days not only gray but uniform. From morning 
until evening, one can do the same thing — play chess, read, engage in argu- 
ment — whereas sunshine, by contrast, shades the hours and discountenances the 
dreamer. The latter, therefore, must get around the days of sun with subter- 
fuges — above all, must rise quite early, like the great idlers, the waterfront loafers 
and the vagabonds: the dreamer must be up before the sun itself. In the "Ode to 
Blessed Morning," which some years past he sent to Emmy Hennings, Ferdi- 
nand Hardekopf, the only authentic decadent that Germany has produced, 
confides to the dreamer the best precautions to be taken for sunny days. 9 

[Dla,9] 

"To give to this dust a semblance of consistency, as by soaking it in blood." Louis 
Veuillot, Les Odeurs de Paris (Paris, 1914), p. 12. [Dla.10] 

Other European cities admit colonnades into their urban perspective, Berlin 
setting the style with its city gates. Particularly characteristic is the Halle Gate — 
unforgettable for me on a blue picture postcard representing Belle- Alliance Platz 
by night. The card was transparent, and when you held it up to the light, all its 
windows were illuminated with the very same glow that came from the full moon 
up in the sky. [D2,l] 

"The buildings constructed f or the new Paris revive all the styles. The ensemble is 
not lacking in a certain unity, however, because allthe styles belong to the category 
of the tedious — in fact, the most tedious of the tedious, which is the emphatic and 
the aligned. Line up! Eyes front! It seems that the Amphion of this city is a corpo- 
ral. . . . / He moves great quantities of things — showy, stately, colossal — and all of 
them are tedious. He moves other things, extremely ugly; they too are tedious. / 
These great streets, these great quays, these great houses, these great sewers, their 
physiognomy poorly copied or poorly dreamed — all have an indeiinable something 
indicative of unexpected and irregular fortune. They exude tedium." Veuillot, Les 
Odeurs de Paris <Paris, 1914>, p. 9. □ Haussmann D [D2,2] 

Pelletan describes a visit with a king of the Stock Exchange, a multimillionaire: 
"As I entered the courtyard of the house, a squad of grooms in red vests were 
occupied in rubbing down a half dozen English horses. I ascended a marble stair- 
case hung with a giant gilded chandelier, and encountered in the vestibule a major- 
domo with white cravat and plump calves. He led me into a large glass-roofed 
gallery whose walls were decorated entirely with camellias and hothouse plants. 
Something like suppressed boredom lay in the air; at the very first step, you 
breathed a vapor as of opium. I then passed hetween two rows of perches on which 
parakeets from various countries were roosting. They were red, blue, green, gray, 
yellow, and white; but all seemed to suffer from homesickness. At the extreme end 
of the gallery stood a small table opposite a Renaissance-style fireplace, for at this 



hour the master of the house took his breakfast. . . . After I had waited a quarter 5 
of an hour, he deigned to appear. . . . He yawned, looked sleepy, and seemed 

continually on the point of nodding off; he walked Jike a somnambulist. His fatigue g 

had infected the walls of his mansion. The parakeets stood out Jike his separate ts 

thoughts, each one materiaJized and attached to a pole. . . . " D Interior D <Julius> 3 

Rodenberg, Paris bei Sonnenschein und Lampenlicht (Leipzig, 1867), pp. 104- § 

105. [D2,3] „ 

Fetes franqaises, on Paris en miniature <French Festivities, or Paris in Mini- ^ 
ature>: produced by Rougemont and Gentil at the Theatre des Varietes. The plot g 
has to do with the marriage of Napoleon I to Marie-Louise, and the conversation, 3 
at this point, concerns the planned festivities. "Nevertheless," says one of the 
characters, "the weather is rather uncertain." — Reply: "My friend, you may rest 
assured that this day is the choice of our sovereign." He then strikes up a song that 
begins: 

At his piercing glance, doubt not — 
The future is revealed; 
And when good weather is required, 
We look to his star. 

Cited in Theodore Muret, L'Histoire par le theatre, 1 789-1851 (Paris, 1865), vol. 
l,p.262. [D2,4] 

"This dull, glib sadness ca Jled ennui." Louis Venillot , Les Odeurs de Paris (Paris , 
1914), p. 177. [D2.5] 

"Along with every outfit go a few accessories which show it off to best effect — that 
is to say, which cost lots of money because they are so quickly ruined, in particular 
by every downpour." This apropos of the top hat. D Fashion D F. Th. Vischer, 
Verniinftige Gedanken iiber die jetzige Mode <in Kritische Gdnge, new series, no. 
3 (Stuttgart, 1861)>, p. 124. [D2,6] 

We are bored when we don't know what we are waiting for. That we do know, or 
think we know, is nearly always the expression of our superficiality or inatten- 
tion. Boredom is the threshold to great deeds. — Now, it would be important to 
know: What is the dialectical antithesis to boredom? [D2,7] 

The quite humorous book by Emile Tardieu, L'Ennui (Paris, 1903), whose main 
thesis is that life is purposeless and groundless and that all striving after happi- 
ness and equanimity is futile, names the weather as one among many factors 
supposedly causing boredom. — This work can be considered a sort of breviary 
for the twentieth century. [D2,8] 



Boredom is a warm gray fabric lined on the inside with the most lustrous and 
colorful of silks. In this fabric we wrap ourselves when we dream. We are at 



home then in the arabesques of its lining. But the sleeper looks bored and gray 
within his sheath. And when he later wakes and wants to tell of what he 
dreamed, he conununicates by and large only this boredom. For who would be 
able at one stroke to turn the lining of time to the outside? Yet to narrate dreams 
signifies nothing else. And in no other way can one deal with the arcades — struc- 
tures in which we relive, as in a dream, the life of our parents and grandparents, 
as the embryo in the womb relives the life of animals. Existence in these spaces 
flows then without accent, like the events in dreams. Fl&nerie is the rhythmics of 
this slumber. In 1839, a rage for tortoises overcame Paris. One can well imagine 
the elegant set mimicking the pace of this creature more easily in the arcades than 
on the boulevards. D Flaneur □ [D2a,l] 

Boredom is always the external surface of unconscious events. For this reason, 
it has appeared to the great dandies as a mark of distinction. Ornament and 
boredom. [D2a,2] 

On the double meaning of the term temps 10 in French [D2a,3] 

Factory labor as economic infrastructure of the ideological boredom of the up- 
per classes. "The miserable routine of endless drudgery and toil in which the 
same mechanical process is repeated over and over again is like the labor of 
Sisyphus. The burden of labor, like the rock, always keeps falling back on the 
worn-out laborer." Friedrich Engels, Die Lage der arbeitenden Klasse in England 
<2nd ed. (Leipzig, 1848)>, p. 217; cited in Marx, Kapital (Hamburg, 1922), vol. 1, 
p. 388. 11 ' [D2a 4] 

The feeling of an "incurable imperfection in the very essence of the present" 
(see Les Plairirs et les jours, cited in Gide's homage) 52 was perhaps, for Proust, the 
main motive for getting to know fashionable society in its innermost recesses, 
and it is an underlying motive perhaps for the social gatherings of all human 
beings. [D2a,5] 

On the salons: "All faces evinced the unmistakable traces of boredom, and conver- 
sations were in general scarce, quiet, and serious. Most of these people viewed 
dancing as drudgery, to which you had to submit because it was supposed to be 
good form to dance." Further on, the proposition that "no other city in Europe, 
perhaps, displays such a dearth of satisfied, cheerful, lively faces at its soirees as 
Paris does in its salons. . . . Moreover, in no other society so much as in this one, 
and by reason of fashion no less than real conviction, is the unbearable boredom 
so roundly lamented." "A natural consequence of this is that social affairs are 
marked by silence and reserve, of a sort that at larger gatherings in other cities 
would most certainly be the exception." Ferdinand von Gall, Paris und seine 
Salons, vol. 1 (Oldenburg, 1844), pp. 151-153, 158. [D2a,6] 



The following lines provide an occasion for meditating on timepieces in apart- 
ments: " A certain blitheness, a casual and even careless regard for the hurrying 



time, an indifferent expenditure of the all too quickly passing hours — these are 
qualities that favor the superficial salon life." Ferdinand von Gall, Paris und seine 
Salons, vol. 2 (Oldenburg, 1845), p. 171. [D2a,7] 



Boredom of the ceremonial scenes depicted in historical paintings, and the dolce 
far niente of battle scenes with all that dwells in the smoke of gunpowder. From 
the images d 'Epinal to Manet's Execution of Emperor Maximilian, it is always the 
same — and always a new — fata morgana, always the smoke in which Mogreby 
<?> or the genie from the bottle suddenly emerges before the dreaming, absent- 
minded art lover. D Dream House, Museums D 13 [D2a,8] 

Chess players at the Cafe de la Regence: "It was there that clever players could he 
seen playing with their backs to the chessboard. It was enough for them to hear the 
name of the piece moved by their opponent at each turn to be assured of winning." 
Histoire des cafes de Paris (Paris, 1857), p. 87. [D2a,9] 

"In sum, classic urban art, after presenting its masterpieces, fell into decrepitude 
at the time of the philosophes and the constructors of systems. The end of the 
eighteenth century saw the birth of innumerable projects; the Commission of Art- 
ists brought them into accord with a body of doctrine, and the Empire adapted 
them without creative originality. The flexible and animated classical style was 
succeeded by the systematic and rigid pseudoclassical style. . . . The Arc de Tri- 
omphe echoes the gate of Louis XIV; the Vendome column is copied from Rome; 
the Church of the Madeleine, the Stock Exchange, the Palais-Bourbon are so 
many Greco-Roman temples." Lucien Dubech and Pierre d'Espezel, Histoire tie 
Paris (Paris, 1926), p. 345. D Interior D [D3,l] 

"The First Empire copied the triumphal arches and monuments of the two classi- 
cal centuries. Then there was an attempt to revive and reinvent more remote 
models: the Second Empire imitated the Renaissance, the Gothic, the Pompeian. 
After this came an epoch of vulgarity without style." Dubech and d'Espezel, His- 
toire tie Paris (Paris, 1926), p. 464. D Interior D [D3,2] 

Announcement for a book by Benjamin Gastineau, La Vie en chemin de fer <Life 
on the Railroad): "L* Vie en chemin defer is an entrancing prose poem. It is an 
epic of modern life, always fiery and turbulent, a panorama of gaiety and tears 
passing before us like the dust of the rails before the windows of the coach." By 
Benjamin Gastineau, Paris en rose (Paris, 1866), p. 4. [D3,3] 

Rather than pass the time, one must invite it in. To pass the time (to kill time, 
expel it): the gambler. Time spills from his every pore. — To store time as a 
battery stores energy: the flaneur. Finally, the third type: he who waits. He takes 
in the time and renders it up in altered form — that of expectation. "' [D3,4] 

''This recently deposited limestone — the bed on which Paris rests — readily crum- 
bles into a dust which, like all limestone dust, is very painful to the eyes and lungs. 



A little rain does nothing at all to help, since it is immediately absorbed and the 
surface left dry once again." "Here is the source of the unprepossessing bleached 
gray of the houses, which are all built from the brittle limestone mined near Paris; 
here, too, the origin of the dun-colored slate roofs that blacken with soot over the 
years, as well as the high, wide chimneys which deface even the public build- 
ings, . . . and which in some districts of the old city stand so close together that 
they almost block the view entirely." J. F. Benzenberg, Briefe geschrieben auf 
einer Reise nach Paris (Dortmund, 1805), vol. 1, pp. 112, 111. [D3,5] 

"Engels told me that it was in Paris in 1848, at the Cafe de la Regence (one of the 
earliest centers of the Revolution of 1789), that Marx first laid out for him the 
economic determinism of his materialist theory of history." Paul Laf argue, 
"Persbnliche Erinnerungen an Friedrich Engels," Die neue Zeit, 23, no. 2 
(Stuttgart, 1905), p. 558. [D3,6] 

Boredom — as index to participation in the sleep of the collective. Is this the 
reason it seems distinguished, so that the dandy makes a show of it? [D3,7] 

In 1757 there were only three cafes in Paris. [D3a,l] 

Maxims of Empire painting: "The new artists accept only 'the heroic style, the 
sublime,' and the sublime is attained only with 'the nude and drapery.' . . . Paint- 
ers are supposed to find their inspiration in Plutarch or Homer, Livy or Virgil, 
and, in keeping with David's recommendation to Gros, are supposed to choose . . . 
'subjects known to everyone.' . . . Subjects taken from contemporary life were, 
because of the clothing styles, unworthy of 'great art.'" A. Malet and P. Grillet, 
XIX" siecle (Paris, 1919), p. 158. D Fashion D [D3a,2] 

"Happy the man who is an observer! Boredom, for him, is a word devoid of 
sense." Victor Fournel, Ce qu'on voit dans les rues tie Paris (Paris, 1858), p. 271. 

[D3a,3] 

Boredom began to be experienced in epidemic proportions during the 1840s. 
Lamartine is said to be the first to have given expression to the malady. It plays a 
role in a little story about the famous comic Deburau. A distinguished Paris 
neurologist was consulted one day by a patient whom he had not seen before. 
The patient complained of the typical illness of the times — weariness with life, 
deep depressions, boredom. "There's nothing wrong with you," said the doctor 
after a thorough examination. "Just try to relax — find something to entertain 
you. Go see Deburau some evening, and life will look different to you." "Ah, dear 
sir," answered the patient, "I am Deburau." [D3a,4] 

Return from the Courses de la Marche: "The dust exceeded all expectations. The 
elegant folk back from the races are virtually encrusted; they remind you of Pom- 



peii. They have had to be exhumed with the help of a brush, if not a pickaxe." 
H. de Pene, Paris intime (Paris, 1859), p. 320. [D3a,5] 



"The introduction of the Macadam system for paving the boulevards gave rise to 
numerous caricatures. Cham shows the Parisians blinded by dust, and he pro- 
poses to erect ... a statue with the inscription: 'In recognition of Macadam, from 
the grateful oculists and opticians.' Others represent pedestrians mounted on 
stilts traversing marshes and bogs." Paris sous la Republique de 1848: Exposition 
de la Bibliotheque et des Travaux historiques de la Ville de Paris (1909) [Poete, 
Beaurepaire, Clouzot, Henriot], p. 25. [D3a,6] 

"Only England could have produced dandyism. France is as incapable of it as its 
neighbor is incapable of anything like our . . . lions, who are as eager to please as 
the dandies are disdainful of pleasing. . . . D'Orsay . . . was naturally and passion- 
ately pleasing to everyone, even to men, whereas the dandies pleased only in 
displeasing. . . . Between the lion and the dandy lies an abyss. But how much 
wider the abyss between the dandy and the fop!" Larousse, <Grand Dictionnaire 
universelle> du dix-neuvieme sieclei, vol. 6 (Paris, 1870), p. 63 (article on the 
dandy)>. [D4,l] 

In the second-to-last chapter of his hook Paris: From Its Origins to the Year 3000 
(Paris, 1886), Leo Claretie speaks of a crystal canopy that would slide over the city 
in case of rain. "In 1987" is the title of this chapter. [D4,2] 

With reference to Chodruc-Duclos: "We are haunted by what was perhaps the 
remains of some rugged old citizen of Herculaneum who, having escaped from 
his underground bed, returned to walk again among us, riddled by the thousand 
furies of the volcano, living in the midst of death." Memoires de Chodruc-Duclos, 
ed. J. Arago and Edouard Gouin (Paris, 1843), vol. 1, p. 6 (preface). The first: 
flaneur among the declasses. [D4,3] 

The world in which one is bored — "So what if one is bored! What influence can it 
possibly have?" "What influence! . . . What influence, boredom, with us? But an 
enormous influence, ... a decisive influence! For ennui, you see, the Frenchman 
has a horror verging on veneration. Ennui, in his eyes, is a terrihle god with a 
devoted cult following. It is only in the grip of boredom that the Frenchman can be 
serious." Edouard Pailleron, he Monde oil Von s'ennuie (1881), Act 1, scene 2; in 
Pailleron, Theatre complet, vol. 3 (Paris <1911>), p. 279. [D4,4] 

Michelet "offers a description, full of intelligence and compassion, of the condition 
of the first specialized factory workers around 1840. There were 'true hells of 
boredom' in the spinning and weaving mills: 'Ever, ever, ever, is the unvarying 
word thundering in your ears from the automatic equipment which shakes even 
the floor. One can never get used to it.' Often the remarks of Michelet (for exam- 
ple, on reverie and the rhythms of different occupations) anticipate, on an intui- 



tive level, the experimental analyses of modern psychologists." Georges Fried- 
mann, La Crise du progres (Paris <1936>), p. 244; quotation from Michelet, Le 
Peuple (Paris, 1846), p. 83. 15 [D4,5] 



Faire drogiier, in the sense of fair e attendre, "to keep waiting," belongs to the 
argot of the armies of the Revolution and of the Empire. According to <Ferdinand> 
Brunot, Histoire de la languefranqaise, vol. 9, La Revolution et I'Empire (Paris, 
1937) <p. 997>. [D4,6] 

Parisian Life: "The contemporary scene is preserved, like a specimen imder glass, 
in a letter of recommendation to Metella given by Baron Stanislas de Frascata to 
his friend Baron Gondremarck. The writer, tied to the 'cold country' in which he 
lives, sighs for the champagne suppers, Metella's sky-blue boudoir, the songs, the 
glamor of Paris, the gay and glittering city, throbbing with warmth and life, in 
which differences of station are abolished. Metella reads the letter to the strains of 
Offenbach's music, which surrounds it with a yearning melancholy, as though 
Paris were paradise lost, and at the same time with a halo of bliss as though it were 
the paradise to come; and, as the action continues, one is gi ven the impression that 
the picture given in the letter is beginning to come to life." S. Kracauer, Jacques 
Offenbach and das Paris seiner Zeit (Amsterdam, 1937), pp. 348-349. 16 

[D4a,l] 

"Romanticism ends in a theory of boredom, the characteristically modern senti- 
ment; that is, it ends in a theory of power, or at least of energy. . . . Romanticism, 
in effect, marks the recognition by the individual of a bundle of instincts which 
society has a strong interest in repressing; but, for the most part, it manifests the 
abdication of the struggle. . . . The Romantic writer . . . turns toward ... a poetry 
of refuge and escape. The effort of Balzac and of Baudelaire is exactly the reverse 
of this and tends to integrate into life the postulates which the Romantics were 
resigned to working with only on the level of art. . . . Their effort is thus linked to 
the myth according to which imagination plays an ever-increasing role in life." 
Roger Caillois, "Paris, mythe moderne," ISouvelle Revue franqaise, 25, no. 284 
(May 1, 1937), pp. 695, 697. [D4a,2] 

1839: "France is bored" (Lamartine). [D4a,3] 

Baudelaire in his essay on Guys: "Dandyism is a mysterious institution, no less 
peculiar than the duel. It is of great antiquity, Caesar, Catiline, and Alcibiades 
providing us with dazzling examples; and very widespread, Chateaubriand having 
found it in the forests and by the lakes of the New World." Baudelaire, L'Art 
romantique (Paris), p. 91. 17 [D4a,4] 

The Guys chapter in L'Art romantique, on dandies: "They are all representatives 
... of that compelling need, alas only too rare today, for combating and destroying 
triviality. . . . Dandyism is the last spark of heroism amid decadence; and the type 
of dandy discovered by our traveler in North America does nothing to invalidate 



this idea; for how can we be sure that those tribes which we call 'savage' may not in 
fact be the disjecta membra of great extinct civilizations? ... It is hardly neces- 
sary to say that when Monsieur G. sketches one of his dandies on paper, he never 
fails to give him his historical personality — his legendary personality, I would 
venture to say, if we were not speaking of the present time and of things generally 
considered frivolous." Baudelaire, L 'Art romantique, vol. 3, ed. Hachette (Paris), 
pp. 94~95. 1!l [D5.1] 



Baudelaire describes the impression that the consummate dandy must convey: "A 
rich man, perhaps, but more likely an out-of-work Hercules!" Baudelaire, L'Art 
romantique (Paris), p. 96. 19 [D5,2] 



In the essay on Guys, the crowd appears as the supreme remedy for boredom: 
'"Any man,' he said one day, in the course of one of those conversations which he 
illumines with burning glance and evocative gesture, 'any man . . . who can yet be 
bored in the heart of the multitude is a blockhead! A blockhead! And I despise 
him!" Baudelaire, U Art romantique, p. 65. 2 * [DJ5,3] 

Among all the subjects first marked out for lyric expression by Baudelaire, one 
can be put at the forefront: bad weather. [D5,4] 



As attributed to a certain "Carlin," the well-known anecdote about Deburau (the 
actor afflicted with boredom) forms the piece de resistance of the versilied Eloge de 
V ennui <Encomium to Boredom), by Charles Boissiere, of the Philotechnical Soci- 
ety (Paris, 1860). — "Carlin" is the name of a breed of dogs; it comes from the first 
name of an Italian actor who played Harlequin. [D5,5] 



"Monotony feeds on the new." Jean Vaudal, Le Tableau noir; cited in E. Jaloux, 
"L'Esprit des livres," Nouvelles litteraires, November 20, 1937. [D5,6] 

Counterpart to Blanqui's view of the world: the universe is a site of lingering 
catastrophes. [D5,7] 

On L'Eternite par les astres: Blanqui, who, on the threshold of the grave, recog- 
nizes the Fort du laureau as his last place of captivity, writes this book in order to 
open new doors in his dungeon. [D5a,l] 

On L'Eternite par les astres: Blanqui yields to bourgeois society. But he's brought 
to his knees with such force that the throne begins to totter. [D5a,2] 

On L'Eternite' par les astres: The people of the nineteenth century see the stars 
against a sky which is spread out in this text. [D5a,3] 



It may be that the figure of Blanqui surfaces in the "Litanies of Satan": "You who 
give the outlaw that serene and haughty look" (<Baudelaire, Oeuvres,> ed. Le 



Dantec, <vol. 1 [Paris, 1931], > p. 138). 21 In point of fact, Baudelaire did a drawing 
from memory that shows the head of Blanqui. [D5a,4] 



To grasp the significance of nouveaute, it is necessary to go back to novelty in 
everyday life. Why does everyone share the newest thing with someone else? 
Presumably, in order to triumph over the dead. This only where there is nothing 
really new. [D5a,5] 

Blanqui's last work, written during his last imprisonment, has remained en- 
tirely unnoticed up to now, so far as I can see. It is a cosmological speculation. 
Granted it appears, in its opening pages, tasteless and banal. But the awkward 
deliberations of the autodidact are merely the prelude to a speculation that only 
this revolutionary could develop. We may call it theological, insofar as hell is a 
subject of theology. In fact, the cosmic vision of the world which Blanqui lays out, 
taking his data from the mechanistic natural science of bourgeois society, is an 
infernal vision. At the same time, it is a complement of the society to which 
Blanqui, in his old age, was forced to concede victory. What is so unsettling is 
that the presentation is entirely lacking in irony. It is an unconditional surrender, 
but it is simultaneously the most terrible indictment of a society that projects this 
image of the cosmos — understood as an image of itself — across the heavens. 
With its trenchant style, this work displays the most remarkable similarities both 
to Baudelaire and to Nietzsche. (Letter of January 6, 1938, to Horkheimer.) 22 

[D5a,6] 

From Blanqui's UEternite par les astres: "What man does not find himself some- 
times faced with two opposing courses? The one he declines would make for a far 
different life, while leaving him his particular individuality. One leads to misery, 
shame, servitude; the other, to glory and liberty. Here, a lovely woman and happi- 
ness; there, fury and desolation. I am speaking now for hoth sexes. Take your 
chances or your choice — it makes no difference, for you will not escape your 
destiny. But destiny finds no footing in infinity, which knows no alternative and 
makes room for everything. There exists a world where a man follows the road 
that, in the other world, his double did not take. His existence divides in two, a 
globe for each; it bifurcates a second time, a third time, thousands of times. He 
thus possesses fully formed doubles with innumerable variants, which, in multi- 
plying, always represent him as a person but capture only fragments of his destiny. 
All that one might have been in this world, one is in another. Along with one's 
entire existence from birth to death, experienced in a multitude of places, one also 
lives, in yet other places, ten thousand different versions of it." Cited in Gustave 
Geffroy, L 'Enferme (Paris, 1897), p. 399. [D6,l] 

From the conclusion of UEternite par les astres: "What I write at this moment in 
a cell of the Fort du Taureau I have written and shall write throughout all eter- 
nity — at a table, with a pen, clothed as I am now, in circumstances like these." 
Cited in Gustave Geffroy, UEnferme (Paris, 1897), p. 401. Right after this, Get- 



froy writes: "He thus inscribes his fate, at each instant of its duration, across the 
numberless stars. His prison cell is multiplied to infinity. Throughout the entire 
universe, he is the same confined man that he is on this earth, with his rebellious 
strength and his freedom of thought." [D6,2] 

From the conclusion of L'Eternite par les astres: "At the present time, the entire 
life of our planet, from birth to death, with all its crimes and miseries, is being 
lived partly here and partly there, day by day, on myriad kindred planets. What 
we call 'progress' is confined to each particular world, and vanishes with it. Al- 
ways and everywhere in the terrestrial arena, the same drama, the same setting, 
on the same narrow stage — a noisy humanity infatuated with its own grandeur, 
believing itself to be the universe and living in its prison as though in some im- 
mense realm, only to founder at an early date along with its globe, which has borne 
with deepest disdain the burden of human arrogance. The same monotony, the 
same immobility, on other heavenly bodies. The universe repeats itself endlessly 
and paws the ground in place." Cited in Gustave Geffroy, L'Enferme (Paris, 
1897), p. 402. [D6a,l] 

Blanqui expressly emphasizes the scientific character of liis theses, which would 
have nothing to do with Fourierist frivolities. "One must concede that each par- 
ticular combination of materials and people 'is hound to be repeated thousands of 
times in order to satisfy the demands of infinity.'" Cited in Geffroy, L'Enferme 
(Paris, 1897), p. 400. [D6a,2] 

Blanqui's misanthropy. "The variations begin with those living creatures that 
have a will of their own, or something like caprices. As soon as human beings enter 
the scene, imagination enters with them. It is not as though they have much effect 
on the planet. . . . Their turbulent activity never seriously disturbs the natural 
progression of physical phenomena, though it disrupts humanity. It is therefore 
advisable to anticipate this subversive influence, which . . . tears apart nations 
and brings down empires. Certainly these brutalities run their course without 
even scratching the terrestrial surface . The disappearance of the disruptors would 
leave no trace of their self-styled sovereign presence, and would suffice to return 
nature to its virtually unmolested virginity." Blanqui, L'Eternite <par les astres 
(Paris, 1872)>, pp. 63-64. [D6a,3] 

Final chapter (8, "Resume") of Blanqui's L'Eternite par les astres: "The entire 
universe is composed of astral systems. To create them, nature has only a hundred 
simple bodies at its disposal. Despite the great advantage it derives from these 
resources, and the innumerable combinations that these resources afford its fe- 
cundity, the result is necessarily a finite number, like that of the elements them- 
selves; and in order to fill its expanse, nature must repeat to infinity each of its 
original combinations or types. I So each heavenly body, whatever it might be, 
exists in infinite number in time and space, not only in one of its aspects but as it is 
at each second of its existence, from birth to death. All the heings distributed 



across its surface, whether large or small, living or inanimate, share the privilege 
of this perpetuity. / The earth is one of these heavenly bodies. Every human being 
is thus eternal at every second of his or her existence. What I write at this moment 
in a cell of the Fort du Taureau I have written and shall write throughout all 
eternity — at a table, with a pen, clothed as I am now, in circumstances like these. 
And thus it is for everyone. / All worlds are engulfed, one after another, in the 
revivifying ilames, to be reborn from them and consumed by them once more — 
monotonous flow of an hourglass that eternally empties and turns itself over. The 
new is always old, and the old always new. / Yet won't those who are interested in 
extraterrestrial life smile at a mathematical deduction which accords them not 
only immortality but eternity? The number of our doubles is infinite in time and 
space. One cannot in good conscience demand anything more. These doubles exist 
in flesh and bone — indeed, in trousers and jacket, in crinoline and chignon. They 
are by no means phantoms; they are the present eternalized. / Here, nonetheless, 
lies a great drawback: there is no progress, alas, hut merely vulgar revisions and 
reprints. Such are the exemplars, the ostensible 'original editions,' of all the 
worlds past and all the worlds to come. Only the chapter on bifurcations is still 
open to hope. Let us not forget: all that one might have been in this world, one is 
in another. I In this world, progress is for our descendants alone. They will have 
more of a chance than we did. All the beautiful things ever seen on our world have, 
of course, already been seen — are being seen at this instant and will always be 
seen — by our descendants, and by their doubles who have preceded and will fol- 
low them. Scions of a finer humanity, they have already mocked and reviled our 
existence on dead worlds, while overtaking and succeeding us. They continue to 
scorn us on the living worlds from which we have disappeared, and their contempt 
for us will have no end on the worlds to come. / They and we, and all the inhabi- 
tants of our planet, are reborn prisoners of the moment and of the place to which 
destiny has assigned us in the series of Earth's avatars. Our continuedlife depends 
on that of the planet. We are merely phenomena that are ancillary to its resurrec- 
tions. Men of the nineteenth century, the hour of our apparitions is fixed forever, 
and always brings us back the very same ones, or at most with a prospect of 
felicitous variants. There is nothing here that will much gratify the yearning for 
improvement. What to do? I have sought not at all my pleasure, but only the truth. 
Here there is neither revelation nor prophecy, but rather a simple deduction on 
the basis of spectral analysis and Laplacian cosmogony. These two discoveries 
make us eternal. Is it a windfall? Let us profit from it. Is it a mystification? Let us 
resign ourselves to it. / . . . / At bottom, this eternity of the human being among 
the stars is a melancholy thing, and this sequestering of kindred worlds by the 
inexorable barrier of space is even more sad. So many identical populations pass 
away without suspecting one another's existence! But no — this has finally been 
discovered, in the nineteenth century. Yet who is inclined to believe it? / Until 
now, the past has, for us, meant barbarism, whereas the future has signified pro- 
gress, science, happiness, illusion! This past, on all our counterpart worlds, has 
seen the most brilliant civilizations disappear without leaving a trace, and they will 
continue to disappear without leaving a trace. The future will witness yet again, on 
billions of worlds, the ignorance, folly, and cruelty of our bygone eras! / At the 



present time, the entire life of our planet, from birth to death, with all its crimes 
and miseries, is being lived partly here and partly there, day by day, on myriad 
kindred planets. What we call 'progress' is confined to each particular world, and 
vanishes with it. Always and everywhere in the terrestrial arena, the same drama, 
the same setting, on the same narrow stage — a noisy humanity infatuated with its 
own grandeur, believing itself to be the universe and living in its prison as though 
in some immense realm, only to founder at an early date along with its globe, which 
has borne with deepest disdain the burden of human arrogance. The same monot- 
ony, the same immobility, on other heavenly bodies. The universe repeats itself 
endlessly and paws the ground in place. In infinity, eternity performs — imper- 
turbably — the same routines." Auguste Blanqui, L'Eternite par les astres: Hy- 
pothese astronomique (Paris, 1872), pp. 73-76. The elided paragraph dwells on 
the "consolation" afforded by the idea that the doubles of loved ones departed 
from Earth are at this very hour keeping our own doubles company on another 
planet. [D7; D7a] 

"Let us think this thought in its most terrible form: existence as it is, without 
meaning or aim, yet recurring inevitably without any finale into nothingness: the 
eternal return [p. 45]. . . . We deny end goals: if existence had one, it would have 
to have been reached." Friedrich Nietzsche, Gesammelte Werke (Munich <1926>), 
vol. 18 {The Will to Power, book 1), p. 46. 23 [D8,l] 

"The doctrine of eternal recurrence would have scholarly presuppositions." 
Nietzsche, Gesammelte Werke (Munich), vol. 18 (The Will to Power, book 1), 
p. 49. 24 [D8,2] 

"The old habit, however, of associating a goal with every event ... is so powerful 
that it recmires an effort for a thinker not to fall into thinking of the very aimless- 
ness of the world as intended. This notion — that the world intentionally avoids a 
goal . . . — must occur to all those who would like to force on the world the capacity 
for eternal novelty [p. 369]. . . . The world, as force, may not be thought of as 
unlimited, for it cannot be so thought of. . . . Thus — the world also lacks the 
capacity for eternal novelty." Nietzsche, Gesammelte Werke, vol. 19 (The Will to 
Power, hook 4), p. 370. 25 [D8,3] 

"The world . . . lives on itself: its excrements are its nourishment." Nietzsche, 
Gesammelte Werke, vol. 19 (The Will to Power, hook 4), p. 3 71. 26 [D8,4] 

The world "without goal, unless the joy of the circle is itself a goal; without will, 
unless a ring feels good will toward itself." Nietzsche, Gesammelte Werke, vol. 19 
(The Will to Power, hook 4), p. 374. 27 [D8,5] 

On eternal recurrence: "The great thought as a Medusa head: all features of the 
world become motionless, a frozen death throe." Friedrich Nietzsche, Gesammelte 
Werke (Munich <1925>), vol. 14 (Unpublished Papers, 1882-1888), p. 188. 

[D8,6] 



"We have created the weightiest thought — now let us create the being for whom it 
is light and pleasing!" Nietzsche, Gesammelte Werke (Munich), vol. 14 (Unpub- 
lished Papers, 1882-1888), p. 179. [D8,7] 



Analogy between Engels and Blanqui: each turned to the natural sciences late in 
life. [D8,8] 

"If the world may be thought of as a certain definite cpiantity of force and as a 
certain definite number of centers of force — and every other representation re- 
mains . . . useless — it follows that, in the great dice game of existence, it must pass 
through a calculable number of combinations. In infinite time, every possible 
combination would at some time or another be realized; more: it would be realized 
an infinite number of times. And since between every combination and its next 
recurrence all other possible combinations would have to take place, ... a circu- 
lar movement of absolutely identical series is thus demonstrated. . . . This concep- 
tion is not simply a mechanistic conception; for if it were that, it would not 
condition an infinite recurrence of identical cases but a final state. Because the 
world has not reached this, mechanistic theory must be considered an imperfect 
and merely provisional hypothesis." Nietzsche, Gesammelte Werke (Munich 
<1926>), vol. 19 (The Will to Power, book 4), p. 373. 2,i [D8a,l] 

In the idea of eternal recurrence, the historicism of the nineteenth century cap- 
sizes. As a result, every tradition, even the most recent, becomes the legacy of 
something that has already run its course in the immemorial night of the ages. 
Tradition henceforth assumes the character of a phantasmagoria in which primal 
history enters the scene in ultramodern get-up. [D8a,2] 

Nietzsche's remark that the doctrine of eternal recurrence does not embrace 
mechanism seems to turn the phenomenon of the perpetuum mobile (for the world 
would be nothing else, according to his teachings) into an argument against the 
mechanistic conception of the world. [D8a,3] 

On the problem of modernity and antiquity. "The existence that has lost its stabil- 
ity and its direction, and the world that has lost its coherence and its significance, 
come together in the will of 'the eternal recurrence of the same' as the attempt to 
repeat — on the peak of modernity, in a symbol — the life which the Greeks lived 
within the living cosmos of the visible world. " Karl Lowith, ISietzsches Philosophic 
der ewigen Wiederkunft des Gleichen (Berlin, 1935), p. 83. [D8a,4] 

LEternite par les astres was written four, at most five, years after Baudelaire's 
death (contemporaneously with the Paris Commune?). — This text shows what 
the stars are doing in that world from which Baudelaire, with good reason, 
excluded them. [D9,l] 

The idea of eternal recurrence conjures the phantasmagoria of happiness from 
the misery of the Founders Years. 29 This doctiine is an attempt to reconcile the 



mutually contradictory tendencies of desire: that of repetition and that of eter- 
nity. Such heroism has its counterpart in the heroism of Baudelaire, who conjures 
the phantasmagoria of modernity from the misery of the Second Empire. 

[D9.2] 

The notion of eternal return appeared at a time when the bourgeoisie no longer 
dared count on the impending development of the system of production which 
they had set going. The thought of Zarathustra and of eternal recurrence belongs 
together with the embroidered motto seen on pillows: "Only a quarter hour." 

[D9,3] 

Critique of the doctrine of eternal recurrence: "As natural scientist . . . , Nietzsche 
is a philosophizing dilettante, and as founder of a religion he is a 'hybrid of 
sickness and will to power'" [preface to Ecce Homo] (p. 83). :!0 "The entire doctrine 
thus seems to be nothing other than an experiment of the human will and an 
attempt to eternalize all our doings and failings, an atheistic surrogate for religion. 
With this accords the homiletic style and the composition of Zarathustra, which 
down to its tiniest details often imitates the New Testament" (pp. 86-87). Karl 
Lowith, Nietzsches Philosophie der eivigen Wiederkunft des Gleichen (Berlin, 
1935). [D9,4] 

There is a handwritten draft in which Caesar instead of Zarathustra is the bearer 
of Nietzsche's tidings (Liwith, p. 73). That is of no little moment. It underscores 
the fact that Nietzsche had an inkling of his doctrine's complicity with imperial- 
ism. [D9,5] 

Lowith calls Nietzsche's "new divination . . . the synthesis of divination from the 
stars with divination from nothingness, which is the last verity in the desert of the 
freedom of individual capacity" (p. 81). [D9,6] 



From "Les Etoiles" <The Stars), by Lamartine: 

Thus these globes of gold, these islands of light, 

Sought instinctively hy the dreaming eye, 

Flash up by the thousands from fugitive shadow, 

Like glittering dust on the tracks of night; 

And the breath of the evening that flies in its wake 

Sends them swirling through the radiance of space. 

All that we seek — love, truth, 

These fruits of the sky, fallen on earth's palate, 

Throughout your brilliant climes we long to see — 

Nourish forever the children of life; 

And one day man perhaps, his destiny fulfilled, 

Will recover in you all the things he has lost. 



<Alphonse de> Lamartine, Oeuvres completes, vol. 1 (Paris, 1850), pp. 221, 224 
(Meditations). This meditation closes with a reverie in which Lamartine is pleased 
to imagine himself transformed into a star among stars. [D9a,l] 



From "L'Infini clans les cieux"<Infinity in the Skies>, by Lamartine: 



Man, nonetheless, that indiscoverable insect, 

Crawling about the hollows of an obscure orb, 

Takes the measure of these fiery planets, 

Assigns them their place in the heavens, 

Thinking, with hands that cannot manage the compass, 

To sift suns like grains of sand. 

And Saturn bedimmed by its distant ring! 

Lamartine, Oeuvres completes (Paris, 1850), pp. 81-82, 82 (Harmonies poetiques 
et religieuses ). [D9a,2] 

Dislocation of hell: "And, finally, what is the place of punishments? All regions of 
the universe in a condition analogous to that of the earth, and still worse." Jean 
Reynaud, Tare et del (Paris, 1854), p. 377. This uncommonly fatuous book pre- 
sents its theological syncretism, its philosophic religieuse, as the new theology. The 
eternity of hell's torments is a heresy: "The ancient trilogy of Earth, Sky, and 
Underworld finds itself reduced, in the end, to the druidical duality of Earth and 
Sky" (p. xiii). [D9a,3] 

Waiting is, in a sense, the lined interior of boredom. (Hebel: boredom waits for 
death.) [D9a,4] 

"I always arrived first. It was my lot to wait for her." J. -J. Rousseau, Les Confes- 
sions, ed. Hilsum (Paris <1931>), vol. 3, p. 115. 31 [D9a,5] 

First intimation of the doctrine of eternal recurrence at the end of the fourth book 
of Die frohliche Wissenschaft: "How, if some day or night a demon were to sneak 
after you into your loneliest loneliness and say to you: 'This life as you now live it 
and have lived it, you will have to live once more and innumerable times more; and 
there will he nothingnewin it, but every pain and every joy and every thought and 
sigh and everything immeasurably small or great in your life must return to you — 
all in the same succession and sequence — even this spider and this moonlight 
between the trees, and even this moment and I myself. The eternal hourglass of 
existence is turned over and over, and you with it, a dust grain of dust. ' Would you 
not . . . curse the demon who spoke thus? Or did you once experience a tremen- 
dous moment when you would have answered him: 'You are a god and never have 
I heard anything more godly!'" 1 * 2 Cited in Lowith, ISietzsches Philosophie der 
ewigen Wiederkunft <des Gleichen (Berlin, 1935)>, p. 57-58. [D10,l] 

Blanqui's theory as a repetition du my the — a fundamental example of the primal 
history of the nineteenth century. In every century, humanity has to be held back 
a grade in school. See the basic formulation of the problem of primal history, of 
Urgeschichte, in N3a,2; also N4,l. [D10,2] 



"Eternal return" is the fundamental form of the urgeschichtlichen, mythic conscious- 
ness. (Mythic because it does not reflect.) [Dl0,3] 



L'Eternite par les astres should he compared with the spirit of '48, as it animates 
Reynaud's Terre et del. With regard to this, Cassou: "On discovering his earthly 
destiny, man feels a sort of vertigo and cannot at first reconcile himself to this 
destiny alone. He must link it up to the greatest possible immensity of time and 
space. Only in the context of its most sweeping breadth will he intoxicate himself 
with heing, with movement, with progress. Only then can he in all confidence and 
in all dignity pronounce the sublime words of Jean Reynaud: 'I have long made a 
practice of the universe. '" "We find nothing in the universe that cannot serve to 
elevate us, and we are genuinely elevated only in taking advantage of what the 
universe offers. The stars themselves , in their sublime hierarchy, are hut a series 
of steps by which we mount progressively toward infinity." <Jean> Cassou, Quar- 
ante-huit <Paris, 1939>, pp. 49, 48. [D10.4] 

Life within the magic circle of eternal return makes for an existence that never 
emerges from the auratic. [D10a,l] 

As life becomes more subject to administrative norms, people must learn to wait 
more. Games of chance possess the great charm of freeing people from having to 
wait. [D10a,2] 

The boulevardier (feuilletonist) has to wait, whereupon he really waits. Hugo's 
"Waiting is life" applies first of all to him. [D10a,3] 

The essence of the mythical event is return. Inscribed as a hidden figure in such 
events is the futility that furrows the brow of some of the heroic personages of 
the underworld (Tantalus, Sisyphus, the Danaides). Tfhnking once again the 
thought of eternal recurrence in the nineteenth century makes Nietzsche the 
figure in whom a mythic fatality is realized anew. (The hell of eternal damnation 
has perhaps impugned the ancient idea of eternal recurrence at its most formida- 
ble point, substituting an eternity of torments for the eternity of a cycle.) 

[D10a,4] 

The belief in progress — in an infinite perfectibility understood as an infinite 
ethical task — and the representation of eternal return are complementary. They 
are the indissoluble antinomies in the face of which the dialectical conception of 
historical time must be developed. In this conception, the idea of eternal return 
appears precisely as that "shallow rationalism" which the belief in progress is 
accused of being, while faith in progress seems no less to belong to the mythic 
mode of thought than does the idea of eternal return. [D10a,5] 