[Haussmannization, Barricade Fighting] 



The flowery realm of decorations, 
The charm of landscape, of architecture, 
And all the effect of scenery rest 
Solely on the law of perspective. 

— Franz Bohle, 'llieater-Catechumus, oder humoristuche Erklirwig ver- 
se/ riedener vorziiglich im Buhnenleben ublicher Fremdworter (Munich), 
p. 74 

I venerate the Beautiful, the Good, and all things great; 
Beautiful nature, on which great art rests — 
How it enchants the ear and charms the eye! 
I love spring in blossom: women and roses. 

— Confession d'un lion devenu vieux (Baron Haussmann, 1888) 

The breathless capitals 

Opened themselves to the cannon. 

— Pierre Dupont, Le Chant des etudiants (Paris, 1849) 



The characteristic and, properly speaking, sole decoration of the Biedemieier 
room "was afforded by the curtains, which — extremely refined and compounded 
preferably from several fabrics of different colors — were furnished by the uphol- 
sterer. For nearly a whole century afterward, interior decoration amounts, in 
theory, to providing instructions to upholsterers for the tasteful arrangement of 
draperies." Max von Boehn, Die Mode im XIX. Jahrhundert , vol. 2 (Munich, 
1907), p. 130. This is something like the interior's perspective on the window. 

[El.l] 

Perspectival character of the crinoline, with its manifold flounces. At least five to 
six petticoats were worn underneath. [El, 2] 

Peep-show rhetoric, perspectival figures of speech: "Incidentally, the figure of 
greatest effect, employed by all French orators from their podiums and tribunes, 
sounds pretty much like this: 'There was in the Middle Ages a book which concen- 



trated the spirit of the times as a mirror concentrates the rays of the sun, a book 
which towered up in majestic glory to the heavens like a primeval forest, a hook in 
which ... a hook for which . . . finally, a hook which . . . hy which and through 
which [the most long-winded specifications follow] ... a book ... a book . . . this 
book was the Divine Comedy.'' Loud applause." Karl Gutzkow, Briefe aus Paris 
(Leipzig, 1842), vol. 2 , pp. 151-152. [El,3] 

Strategic basis for the perspectival articulation of the city. A contemporary seek- 
ing to justify the construction of large thoroughfares under Napoleon III speaks 
of them as "unfavorable 'to the habitual tactic of local insurrection."' Marcel 
Poete, Une vie de cite (Paris, 1925), p. 469. "Open up this area of continual 
disturbances." Baron Haussmann, in a memorandum calling for the extension of 
the Boulevard de Strasbourg to Chatelet. Emile de Labedolliere, Le Nouveau 
Paris, p. 52. But even earlier than this: "They are paving Paris with wood in 
order to deprive the Revolution of building materials. Out of wooden blocks 
there will be no more barricades constructed." Gutzkow, Briefe aus Paris, vol. 1 , 
pp. 60-61. What this means can be gathered from the fact that in 1830 there 
were 6,000 barricades. [El,4] 

"In Paris . . . they are fleeing the arcades, so long in fashion, as one flees stale air. 
The arcades are dying. From time to time, one of them is closed, like the sad 
Passage Delorme, where, in the wilderness of the gallery, female figures of a taw- 
dry antiquity used to dance along the shopfronts, as in the scenes from Pompeii 
interpreted hy Guerinon Hersent. The arcade that for the Parisian was a sort of 
salon-walk, where you strolled and smoked and chatted, is now nothing more than 
a species of refuge which you think of when it rains. Some of the arcades maintain 
a certain attraction on account of this or that famed establishment still to be found 
there. But it is the tenant's renown that prolongs the excitement, or rather the 
death agony, of the place. The arcades have one great defect for modern Parisians: 
you could say that, just like certain paintings done from stifled perspectives, 
they're in need of air." Jules Claretie, La Vie a Paris, 1895 (Paris, 1896), pp. 47ff. 

[El,5] 

The radical transformation of Paris was carried out under Napoleon III mainly 
along the axis running through the Place de la Concorde and the Hotel de Ville. 
It may be that the Franco-Prussian War of 1870 was a blessing for the architec- 
tural image of Paris, seeing that Napoleon III had intended to alter whole dis- 
tricts of the city. Stahr thus writes, in 1857, that one had to make haste now to see 
the old Paris, for "the new ruler, it seems, has a mind to leave but little of it 
standing." < Adolf Stahr, Nach Jiinfjahren, vol. 1 (Oldenburg, 1857), p. 36. > 

[El,6] 



The stifled perspective is plush for the eyes. Plush is the material of the age of 
Louis Philippe. D Dust and Rain D [El, 7] 



Regarding "stifled perspectives": '"You can come to the panorama to do drawings 
from nature,' David told his students." Emile de LabedoJliere, he Nouveau Paris 
(Paris), p. 31. [El,8] 



Among the most impressive testimonies to the age's unquenchable thirst for 
perspectives is the perspective painted on the stage of the opera in the Musee 
Grevin. (This arrangement should be described.) [El,9] 

"Having, as they do, the appearance of walling-in a massive eternity, Hauss- 
mann's urban works are a wholly appropriate representation of the absolute gov- 
erning principles of the Empire: repression of every individual formation, every 
organic self-development, 'fundamental hatred of all individuality."' J. J. Honeg- 
ger, Grundsteine einer allgemeinen Kulturgeschichte der neuesten Zeit, vol. 5 
(Leipzig, 1874), p. 326. But Louis Philippe was already known as the Roi-Macon 
< Mason King>. [Ela.l] 

On the transformation of the city under Napoleon III: "The subsoil has been 
profoundly disturbed by the installation of gas mains and the construction of 
sewers. . . . Never hefore in Paris have so many building supplies been moved 
about, so many houses and apartment buildings constructed, so many monuments 
restored or erected, so many facades dressed with cut stone. ... It was necessary 
to act quickly and to take advantage of properties acquired at a very high cost: a 
double stimulus. In Paris, shallow basements have taken the place of deep cellars, 
which required excavations a full story deep. The use of concrete and cement, 
which was first made possible by the discoveries of Vicat, has contributed both to 
the reasonable cost and to the boldness of these substructions." E. Levasseur, 
Ilistoire des classes ouvrieres et de Vindustrie en France de 1789 a 1870, vol. 2 
(Paris, 1904), pp. 528-529. D Arcades D [Ela,2] 

"Paris, as we find it in the period following the Revolution of 1848, was about to 
become uninhabitable. Its population had been greatly enlarged and unsettled by 
the incessant activity of the railroad (whose rails extended further each day and 
linked up with those of neighboring countries), and now this population was suffo- 
cating in the narrow, tangled, putrid alleyways in which it was forcibly confined." 
<Maxime> Du Camp, Paris, vol. 6 <Paris, 1875>, p. 253. [Ela,3] 

Expropriations under Haussmann. "Certain barristers made a specialty of this 
kind of case. . . . They defended real estate expropriations, industrial expropria- 
tions, tenant expropriations, sentimental expropriations; they spoke of a roof for 
fathers and a cradle for infants. . . . 'How did you make your fortune?' a parvenu 
was asked: 'I've been expropriated,' came the response. ... A new industry was 
created, which, on the pretext of taking in hand the interests of the expropriated, 
dM not shrink from the basest fraud. ... It sought out small manufacturers and 
equipped them with detailed account books, false inventories, and fake merchan- 



dise that often was nothing more than logs wrapped in paper. It would even pro- 
cure groups of customers to fill the shop on the day the jury made their prescribed 
visit. It fabricated leases — exaggerated, extended, antedated— on sheets of old 
paper bearing official stamps, which it had managed to procure. It would have 
stores newly repainted and staffed with improvised clerks, whom it paid three 
francs a day. It was a sort of midnight gang that rifled the till of the city govern- 
ment." Du Camp, Paris, vol. 6, pp. 255-256. [Ela,4] 

Engels' critique of barricade tactics: "The most that the insurrection can actually 
implement in the way of tactical practice is the correct construction and defense of 
a single barricade." But "even in the classic period of street fighting, . . . the 
barricade produced more of a moral than a material effect. It was a means of 
shaking the steadfastness of the military. If it held on until this was attained, then 
victory was won; if not, there was defeat." Friedrich Engels, Introduction to Karl 
Marx, Die Klassenkmmpfe in Frankreich, 1848-1850 (Berlin, 1895), pp. 13, 14. 1 

[Ela,5] 

No less retrograde than the tactic of civil war was the ideology of class struggle. 
Marx on the February Revolution: "In the ideas of the proletarians, . . . who 
confused the finance aristocracy with the bourgeoisie in general; in the imagina- 
tion of good old republicans, who denied the very existence of classes or, at most, 
admitted them as a result of the constitutional monarchy; in the hypocritical 
phrases of the segments of the bourgeoisie up till now excluded from power — in 
all these, the rule of the bourgeoisie was abolished with the introduction of the 
republic. All the royalists were transformed into republicans, and all the million- 
aires of Paris into workers. The phrase which corresponded to this imagined 
liquidation of class relations was fraternite." Karl Marx, Die Klassenkcimfife in 
Frankreich (Berlin, 1895), p. 29. 2 [Ela,6] 

In a manifesto in which he proclaims the right to work, Lamartine speaks of 
the "advent of the industrial Christ." Journal des economistes, 10 (1845), p. 212 , :i 
D Industry D [Ela,7] 

"The reconstruction of the city . , . , by obliging the workers to find lodgings in 
outlying arrondissements, has dissolved the bonds of neighborhood that pre- 
viously united them with the bourgeoisie." Levasseur, Histoire des classes ou- 
vrieres et de Vindustrie en France, vol. 2 <Paris, 1904.>, p. 775. [E2,l] 

"Paris is musty and close." Louis Veuillot, Les Odeurs de Paris (Paris, 1914), 
p. 14. [E2,2] 



Parks, squares, and puhlic gardens first installed under Napoleon III. Between 
forty and fifty were created. [E2,3] 



Construction in the Faubourg Saint-Antoine: Boulevard Prince Eugene, Boule- 
vard Mazas, and Boulevard Richard Lenoir, as strategic axes. [E2,4] 



The heightened expression of the dull perspective is what you get in panoramas. 
It signifies nothing to their detriment but only illuminates their style when Max 
Brod writes: "Interiors of churches, or of palaces or art galleries, do not make for 
beautiful panorama images. They come across as flat, dead, obstructed." <Max 
Brod,> liber die Schonheit hasslicher Bilder (Leipzig, 1913), p. 63. An accurate 
description, except that it is precisely in this way that the panoramas serve the 
epoch's will to expression. □ Dioramas G [E2,5] 

On June 9, 1810, at the Theatre de la Rue de Chartres, a play by Barre, Radet, 
and Desf ontaines is given its first performance. Entitled Monsieur Durelief, ou Les 
Embellissements de Paris, it presents a series of rapid scenes as in a review, show- 
ing the changes wrought in Parisian life by Napoleon I. "An architect who is the 
bearer of one of those significant names formerly in use on the stage, M. Durelief, 
has fabricated a miniature Paris, which he intends to exhibit. Having labored 
thirty years on this project, he thinks he has finished it at last; but suddenly a 
'creative spirit' appears, and proceeds to prune and sharpen the work, creating 
the need for incessant corrections and additions: 



This vast and wealthy capital, 
Adorned with his fine monuments, 
I keep as a cardboard model in my room, 
And I follow the embellishments. 
But always I find myself in arrears — 
By my word, it's getting desperate: 
Even in miniature, one cannot do 
What that man does full-scale." 



The play ends with an apotheosis of Marie-Louise, whose portrait the goddess of 
the city of Paris holds, as her loveliest ornament, high above the heads of the 
audience. Cited in Theodore Muret, L'Histoire par le themtre, 1789-1851 (Paris, 



Use of omnibuses to build barricades. The horses were unharnessed, the passen- 
gers were put off, the vehicle was turned over, and the flag was fastened to an axle. 



On the expropriations: "Before the war, there was talk of demolishing the Passage 
du Caire in order to put a circus on the site. Today there's a shortage of funds, and 
the proprietors (all forty-four of them) are hard to please. Let's hope there's a 
shortage of funds for a long time to come and the proprietors become still harder to 
please. The hideous gap of the Boulevard Haussmann at the corner of the Rue 
Drouot, with all the charming houses it has brought down, should content us for 
the moment." Paul Leautaud, "Vieux Paris," Mercure de France (October 15, 



1865), vol. l,pp. 253-254. 



[E2,6] 



[E2,7] 



1927), p. 503. 



[E2.8] 



Haussmann and the Chamber of Deputies: "One day, in an excess of terror, they 
accused him of having created a desert in the very center of Paris! That desert was 
the Boulevard Sebastopol." Le Corbusier, Urbanisme (Paris <1925>), p. 149.' 1 

[E2.9] 

Very important: "Haussmann's Equipment" — illustrations in Le Corbusier, Ur- 
banisme, p. 150. 5 Various shovels, picks, wheelbarrows, and so on. [E2,U] 

Jules Ferry, Comptesfantastiques d'Haussmann <Paris, 1868>. Pamphlet directed 
against Haussmann's autocratic management of finances. [E2,ll] 

"The avenues [Haussmann] cut were entirely arbitrary: they were not based on 
strict deductions of the science of town planning. The measures he took were of a 
financial and military character." Le Corbusier, Urbanisme (Paris), p. 250/' 

[E2a,l] 

"... the impossibility of obtaining permission to photograph an adorable wax- 
work figure in the Musee Grevin, on the left, between the hall of modern political 
celebrities and the hall at the rear of which, behind a curtain, is shown 'an 
evening at the theater': it is a woman fastening her garter in the shadows, and is 
the only statue I know of with eyes — the eyes of provocation." Andre Breton, 
Nadja (Paris, 1928), pp. 199-200. 7 Very striking fusion of the motif of fashion 
with that of perspective. D Fashion D [E2a,2] 

To the characterization of this suffocating world of plush belongs the description 
of the role of flowers in interiors. After the fall of Napoleon Bonaparte, an 
attempt was made at first to return to rococo. But this was hardly feasible. The 
European situation after the Restoration was the following: "Typically, Corin- 
thian columns are used almost everywhere. . . . This pomp has something 
oppressive about it, just as the restless bustle accompanying the city's trans- 
formation robs natives and foreigners alike of both breathing space and space for 
reflection. . . . Every stone bears the mark of despotic power, and all the ostenta- 
tion makes the atmosphere, in the literal sense of the words, heavy and close. . . . 
One grows dizzy with this novel display; one chokes and anxiously gasps for 
breath. The feverish haste with which the work of several centuries is accom- 
plished in a decade weighs on the senses." Die Grenzboten,]oumcd of politics and 
literature (<Leipzig,> 1861), semester 2, vol. 3, pp. 143-144 ("Die Pariser Kunst- 
ausstellung von 1861 und die bildende Kunst des 19"" Jahrhunderts in Frank- 
reich"). The author probably Julius Meyer. These remarks are aimed at 
Haussmann. D Plush □ [E2a,3] 

Remarkable propensity for structures that convey and connect — as, of course, 
the arcades do. And this connecting or mediating function has a literal and spatial 
as well as a figurative and stylistic bearing. One thinks, above all, of the way the 
Louvre links up with the Tuileries. "The imperial govermnent has built practi- 



cally no new independent buildings, aside from barracks. But, then, it has been 
all the more zealous in completing the barely begun and half -finished works of 
previous centuries. ... At first sight, it seems strange that the government has 
made it its business to preserve existing monuments. . . . The government, how- 
ever, does not aim to pass over the people like a storm; it wants to engrave itself 
lastingly in their existence. . . . Let the old houses collapse, so long as the old 
monuments remain." Die Grenzboten (1861), semester 2, vol. 3, pp. 139-141 
("Die Pariser Kunstausstellung von 1861"). □ Dream House D [E2a,4] 

Connection of the railroads to Haussmann's projects. From a memorandum by 
Haussmann: "The railway stations are today the principal entryways into Paris. 
To put them in communication with the city center by means of large arteries is a 
necessity of theiirst order." E. de Labedolliere, Histoire du nouveau Paris, p. 32. 
This applies in particular to the so-called Boulevard du Centre: the extension of 
the Boulevard de Strasbourg to Chatelet by what is today the Boulevard Sebas- 
topol. [E2a,5] 

Opening of the Boulevard Sebastopollike the unveiling of a monument. "At 2:30 in 
the afternoon, at the moment the [imperial] procession was approaching from the 
Boulevard Saint-Denis, an immense scrim, which had masked the entrance to the 
Boulevard de Sevastopol from this side, was drawn like a curtain. This drapery 
had been hung between two Moorish columns, on the pedestals of which were 
figures representing the arts, the sciences, industry, and commerce." Labedol- 
liere, Histoire du nouveau Paris, p. 32. [E2a,6] 

Haussmann's predilection for perspectives, for long open vistas, represents an 
attempt to dictate art forms to technology (the technology of city planning). This 
always results in kitsch. [E2a,7] 

Haussmann on himself: "Born in Paris, in the old Faubourg du Roule, which is 
joined now to the Fauhourg Saint-Honore at the point where the Boulevard 
Haussmann ends and the Avenue de Friedland begins; student at the College 
Henri IV and the old Lycee Napoleon, which is situated on the Montagne Sainte- 
Genevieve, where I later studied at the law school and, at odd moments, at the 
Sorbonne and the College de France. I took walks, moreover, through all parts of 
the city, and I was often absorbed, during my youth, in protracted contemplation 
of a map of this many-sided Paris , a map which revealed to me weaknesses in the 
network of public streets. / Despite my long residence in the provinces (no less 
than twenty-two years!), I have managed to retain my memories and impressions 
of former times, so that, when I was suddenly called upon, some days ago, to direct 
the transformation of the Capital of the Empire (over which the Tuileries and City 
Hall are currently at loggerheads), I felt myself, in fact, better prepared than one 
might have supposed to fulfill this complex mission, and ready, in any case, to 
enter boldly into the heart of the problems to be resolved." Memoires du Baron 
Haussmann, vol. 2 (Paris, 1890), pp. 34—35. Demonstrates very well how it is 



often distance alone that, intervening hetween plan and work, enahles the plan to 
he realized. [E3,l] 



How Baron Haussmann advanced upon the dream city that Paris still was in 1860. 
From an article of 1882: "There were hills in Paris, even on the Boulevards. . . . 
We lacked water, markets, light in those remote times — scarcely thirty years ago. 
Some gas jets had begun to appear — that is all. We lacked Churches, too. A num- 
ber of the more ancient ones, including the most beautiful, were serving as stores, 
barracks, or offices. The others were wholly concealed by a growth of tumbledown 
hovels. Still, the Railroads existed; each day in Paris they discharged torrents of 
travelers who could neither lodge in our houses nor roam through our tortuous 
streets. / . . . He [Haussmann] demolished some qumrtiers — one might say, entire 
towns. There were cries that he would hring on the plague; he tolerated such 
outcries and gave us instead — through his well-considered architectural break- 
throughs — air, health, and life. Sometimes it was a Street that he created, some- 
times an Avenue or Boulevard; sometimes it was a Square, a Public Garden, a 
Promenade. He established Hospitals, Schools, Campuses. He gave us a whole 
river. He dug magnificent sewers." Memoires du Baron Haussmann, vol. 2 (Paris, 
1890), pp. x, xi. Extracts from an article by Jules Simon in he Gaulois, May 1882. 
The numerous capital letters appear to he a characteristic orthographic interven- 
tion hy Haussmann. [E3,2] 

From a conversation, later on, between Napoleon III and Haussmann. Napoleon: 
"How right you are to maintain that the People of France, who are generally 
thought so fickle, are at bottom the most routine people in the world!" "Yes, Sire, 
though I would add: with regard to things! ... I myself am charged with the 
double offense of having unduly disturbed the Population of Paris by boulever- 
sant, by 'boulevardizing,' almost all the quartiers of the city, and of having al- 
lowed it to keep the same profile in the same setting for too long." Memoires du 
Baron Haussmann, vol. 2 (Paris, 1890), pp. 18-19. <Compare E9,l.> [E3,3] 

From a discussion between Napoleon III and Haussmann on the latter's assuming 
his duties in Paris. Haussmann: "I would add that, although the population of 
Paris as a whole was sympathetic to the plans for the transformation — or, as it was 
called then, the 'embellishment' — of the Capital of the Empire, the greater part of 
the bourgeoisie and almost all the aristocracy were hostile." Why though? 
Memoires du Baron Haussmann, vol. 2 (Paris, 1890), p. 52. [E3,4] 

"I left Munich on the sixth of Fehruary, spent ten days in archives in northern 
Italy, and arrived in Rome under a pouring rain. I found the Haussmannization of 
the city well advanced." Briefe von Ferdinand Gregorovius an den Staatssekretar 
Hermann von Thile, ed. Hermann von Petersdorff (Berlin, 1894), p. 110. 

[E3,5] 

Nickname for Haussmann: "Pasha Osman." He himself makes the comment, with 
reference to his providing the city with spring water: "I must build myself an 



?3 aqueduct." Another bon mot: "My titles? ... I have been named artist-demoli- 

^ tionist." [E3,6] 

bp 

■S 

"In 1864, defending the arbitrary character of the city's government, [Hauss- 
k mann] adopted a tone of rare boldness. 'For its inhabitants, Paris is either a great 

'g marketplace of consumption, a giant stockyard of labor, an arena of ambitions, or 

g simply a rendezvous of pleasures. It is not their home. . . .' Then the statement 

^ that polemicists will attach to his reputation like a stone: 'If there are a great many 

.g who come to find an honorable situation in the city, . . . there are also others, 

veritable nomads in the midst of Parisian society, who are absolutely destitute of 
U municipal sentiment.' And, recalling that everything — railroads, administrative 

£ networks, branches of national activity — eventually leads to Paris, he concluded: 

jjS Tt is thus not surprising that in France, country of aggregation and of order, the 

capital almost always has been placed, with regard to its communal organization, 
under an emergency regime."' Georges Laronze, he Baron Haussmann (Paris, 
1932), pp. 172-173. Speech of November 28, 1864. [E3a,l] 

Political cartoons represented "Paris as bounded by the wharves of the English 
Channel and those of the south of France, by the highways of the Rhine valley and 
of Spain; or, according to Cham, as the city which gets for Christmas the houses in 
the suburbs! . . . One caricature shows the Rue de Rivoli stretching to the hori- 
zon." Georges Laronze, he Baron Haussmann (Paris, 1932), pp. 148-149. 

[E3a,2] 

"New arteries . . . would link the center of Paris with the railroad stations, reduc- 
ing congestion in the latter. Others would take part in the battle against poverty 
and revolution; they would be strategic routes, breaking through the sources of 
contagion and the centers of unrest, and permitting, with the influx of better air, 
the arrival of an armed force, hence connecting, like the Rue de Turbigo, the 
government with the barracks, and, like the Boulevard du Prince-Eugene, the 
barracks with the suburbs." Georges Laronze, he Baron Haussmann, pp. 137— 
138. [E3a,3] 

"An independent deputy, the comte de Durfort-Civrac, . . . objected that these 
new boulevards, which were supposed to aid in repressing disturbances, would 
also make them more likely because, in order to construct them, it was necessary 
to assemble a mass of workers." Georges Laronze, he Baron Haussmann, p. 133. 

[E3a,4] 

Haussmann celebrates the birthday — or name day (April 5)? — of Napoleon III. 
"Running the length of the Champs-Elysees, from the Place de la Concorde to the 
Etoile, there was a scalloped border of 124 sculpted arcades reposing on a double 
row of columns. Tt is a reminiscence,' he Constitutionnel sought to explain, 'of 
Cordova and the Alhambra. ' . . . The visual effect was thus very striking, with the 
swirling branches of the fifty-six great streetlights along the avenue, the reflections 



from the surfaces below, and the flickering of flames from the five hundred thou- 
sand jets of gas." Georges Laronze, he Baron Haussmann, p. 119. D Flaneur Q 

[E3a,5] 

On Haussmann: "Paris now ceased forever to be a conglomeration of small towns, 
each with its distinctive physiognomy and way of life — where one was born and 
where one died, where one never dreamed of leaving home, and where nature and 
history had collaborated to realize variety in unity. The centralization, the mega- 
lomania, created an artificial city, in which the Parisian (and this is the crucial 
point) no longer feels at home; and so, as soon as he can, he leaves. And thus a new 
need arises: the craving for holidays in the country. On the other hand, in the city 
deserted by its inhabitants, the foreigner arrives on a specified date — the start of 
'the season.' The Parisian, in his own town, which has become a cosmopolitan 
crossroads, now seems like one deracinated." Lucien Dubech and Pierre 
d'Espezel, (Histoire de Paris (Paris, 1926),> pp. 427-428. [E3a,6] 

"Most of the time, it was necessary to resort to a jury of expropriations. Its mem- 
bers, cavilers from birth, adversaries on principle, showed themselves generous 
with funds which, as they supposed, cost them nothing and from which each was 
hoping one day to benefit. In a single session where the city might offer a million 
and a half, the jury would demand from it nearly three million. The beautiful field 
of speculation! Who wouldn't want to do his part? There were barristers specializ- 
ing in the matter; there were agencies guaranteeing (in return for a commission) a 
serious profit; there were operations for simulating a lease or a commercial trans- 
action, and for doctoring account books." Georges Laronze, Le Baron Hauss- 
mann (Paris, 1932), pp. 190-191. [E4,l] 

From the Lamentations raised against Haussmann: "You will live to see the city 
grown desolate and bleak. / Your glory will be great in the eyes of future archae- 
ologists, but your last days will be sad and bitter. I ... I And the heart of the city 
will slowly freeze. I ... I Lizards, stray dogs, and rats will rule over this mag- 
nificence. The injuries inflicted by time will accumulate on the gold of the balco- 
nies, and on the painted murals. I .... I And loneliness, the tedious goddess of 
deserts, will come and settle upon this new empire you will have made for her by so 
formidable a labor." Paris desert: Lamentations d'un Jeremie haussmannise 
<(Paris, 1868), pp. 7-8>. [E4,2] 

"The problem of the embellishment — or, more precisely, of the regeneration — of 
Paris arose about 1852. Until then, it had been possible to leave this great city in 
its state of dilapidation, but now it became necessary to deal with the matter. This 
was because, by a fortuitous coincidence, France and the countries around it were 
completing the construction of those long lines of railroad tracks which crisscross 
Europe." Paris nouveau juge par un jlaneur (Paris, 1868), p. 8. [E4,3] 

"I read, in a book which enjoyed great success last year, that the streets of Paris 
had been enlarged to permit ideas to circulate and, above all, regiments to pass. 



This malicious statement (which comes in the wake of others) is the equivalent of 
saying that Paris has been strategically embellished. Well, so be it. ... I do not 
hesitate to proclaim that strategic embellishments are the most admirable of em- 
bellishments." Paris nouveau juge par un flaneur (Paris, 1868), pp. 21-22. 

[E4,4] 

"They say that the city of Paris has condemned itself to forced labor, in the sense 
that, if it ever ceased its various construction projects and forced its numerous 
workers to return to their respective provinces, from that day forward its toll 
revenues would diminish considerably." Paris nouveau juge par un flaneur 
(Paris, 1868), p. 23. [E4,5] 

Proposal to link the right to vote for the Paris municipal council to proof of at least 
fifteen months' residence in the city. Part of the reasoning: "If you examine the 
matter closely, you will soon realize that it is precisely during the agitated, adven- 
turous, and turbulent period of his existence , . . that a man resides in Paris." 
Paris nouveau juge par un flimeur, p. 33. [E4,6] 

"It is understood that the follies of the city promote reason of state." Jules Ferry, 
Comptes fantastiques d'Haussmann (Paris, 1868), p. 6. [E4,7] 

"The concessions, worth hundreds of millions, are apportioned sub rosa. The 
principle of public adjudication is set aside, as is that of cooperation." Ferry, 
Comptes fantastiques, p. 11. [E4a,l] 

Ferry analyzes (pp. 21-23 of his Comptes fantastiques) the judgments rendered in 
cases of expropriation — judgments which, in the course of Haussmann's projects, 
took on a tendency unfavorable to the city. Following a decree of December 27, 
1858 — which Ferry regards as merely the normalization of an ancient right, but 
which Haussmann regards as the establishment of a new right — the city was de- 
nied the possibility of expropriating in their entirety properties which lay in the 
way of the new arteries. The expropriation was limited to those portions immedi- 
ately required for the construction of the streets. In this way, the city lost out on 
the profits it had hoped to make from the sale of remaining plots of land, whose 
value was driven up by the construction. [E4a,2] 

From Haussmann's memorandum of December 11, 1867: "There is a deep-rooted 
and long-standing conviction that the last two methods of acquisition did not by 
any means automatically terminate the tenants' occupancy. But the Court of Ap- 
peals has ruled, in various decisions spanning the period 1861-1865, that, vis-a- 
vis the city, the judgment requiring the consent of the seller, taken together with 
the private contract, has the effect ipso jure of dissolving the lease of the tenants. 
As a consequence, many of the tenants doing business in houses acquired for 
the city by mutual agreement . . . have acted to annul their leases before the date 
of expropriation and have demanded to be immediately evicted and compen- 



sated. . . . The city . . . has ha d to pay enormous, unforeseen indemnities." Cited 
in Ferry, Comptes fantastiques, p. 24. [E4a,3] 



"Louis-Napoleon Bonaparte felt his vocation to be the securing of the 'bourgeois 
order.' . . . Industry and trade, the affairs of the bourgeoisie, were to prosper. An 
immense number of concessions were given out to the railroads; public subven- 
tions were granted; credit was organized. The wealth and luxury of the bourgeois 
world increased. The 1850s saw the . . . beginnings of the Parisian department 
stores: Au Bon Marche, Au Louvre, La Belle Jardiniere. The turnover at Au Bon 
Marche — which, in 1852, was only 450,000 francs — rose, by 1869, to 21 million." 
Gisela Freund, "Entwicklung der Photographie in Frankreich" [manuscript]. 8 

[E4a,4] 

Around 1830: "The Rue Saint-Denis and Rue Saint-Martin are the principal ar- 
teries in this quartier, a godsend for rioters. The war for the streets was deplorably 
easy there. The rebels had only to rip up the pavement and then pile up various 
objects: furniture from neighboring houses, crates from the grocer's, and, if need 
be, a passing omnibus, which they would stop, gallantly helping the ladies to 
disembark. In order to gain these Thermopylaes, it was thus necessary to demolish 
the houses. The line infantry would advance into the open, heavily armed and well 
equipped. A handful of insurgents behind a barricade could hold an entire regi- 
ment at bay." Dubech and d'Espezel, Histoire de Paris (Paris, 1926), pp. 365-366. 

[E4a,5] 

Under Louis Philippe; "In the interior of the city, the governing idea seems to have 
been to rearrange the strategic lines that played so important a role in the historic 
days of July: the line of the quays, the line of the boulevards. . . . Finally, at the 
center, the Rue de Rambuteau, grandsire of the Haussmannized thoroughfares: it 
presented, at Les Halles, in the Marais, a breadth that seemed considerable 
then — thirteen meters." Dubech and d'Espezel, Histoire de Paris (Paris, 1926), 
pp. 382-383. [E5,l] 

Saint-Simonians: "During the cholera epidemic of 1832, they called for the demo- 
lition of crowded, closely built neighborhoods, which was excellent. But they de- 
manded that Louis Philippe and Lafayette set the pace with shovel and pickaxe; 
the workers were supposed to work under the direction of uniformed Polytechni- 
cians, and to the sound of military music; the most beautiful women in Paris were 
to come and offer their encouragement." Dubech and d'Espezel, Histoire de Paris, 
pp. 392-393. D Industrial Development D Secret Societies D [E5,2] 

"All efforts notwithstanding, the newly constructed buildings did not suffice to 
accommodate the expropriated. The result was a grave crisis in rents: they dou- 
bled. In 1851, the population was 1,053,000; after the annexation in 1866, it 
increased to more than 1,825»000. At the end of the Second Empire, Paris had 
60,000 houses and 612,000 apartments, of which 481,000 were rented f or less than 



500 francs. Buildings grew taller, but ceilings became lower. The government had 
to pass a law requiring a minimum ceiling height of 2 meters 60 centimeters." 
Dubech and d'Espezel, pp. 420-421. [E5,3] 



"Scandalous fortunes were amassed by those in the prefect's inner circle. A legend 
attributes to Madame Haussmann a naive remark in a salon: Tt is curious that 
every time we buy a house, a boulevard passes through it.'" Dubech and 



"At the end of his wide avenues, Haussmann constructs — for the sake of perspec- 
tive — various monuments: a Tribunal of Commerce at the end of the Boulevard 
Sevastopol, and bastard churches in all styles, such as Saint-Augustin (where 
Baltard copies Byzantine structures), a new Saint-Ambroise, and Saint-Francois- 
Xavier. At the end of the Chaussee d'Antin, the Church of La Trinite imitates the 
Renaissance style. Sainte-Clotilde imitates the Gothic style, while Saint- Jean de 
Belleville, Saint-Marcel, Saint-Bernard, and Saint-Eugene are all products of iron 
construction and the hideous embrasures of false Gothic. . . . Though Haussmann 
had some good ideas, he realized them badly. He depended heavily on perspec- 
tives, for example, and took care to put monuments at the end of his rectilinear 
streets. The idea was excellent, but what awkwardness in the execution! The 
Boulevard de Strasbourg frames the enormous flight of steps at the Tribunal of 
Commerce, and the Avenue de l'Opera provides a vista of the porter's lodge at the 
Louvre." Dubech and d'Espezel, pp. 416, 425. [E5,5] 

"Above all, the Paris of the Second Empire is cruelly lacking in beauty. Not one of 
these great straight avenues has the charm of the magnificent curve of the Rue 
Saint-Antoine, and no house of this period affords anything like the tender de- 
lights of an eighteenth-century facade, with its rigorous and graceful orders. Fi- 
nally, this illogical city is structurally weak. Already the architects are saying that 
the Opera is cracked, that La Trinite is crumbling, and that Saint-Augustin is 



"In Haussmann's time, there was a need for new roads, but not necessarily for the 
new roads he built. . . . The most striking feature of his projects is their scorn for 
historical experience. . . . Haussmann lays out an artificial city, like something in 
Canada or the Far West. . . . His thoroughfares rarely possess any utility and 
never any beauty. Most are astonishing architectural intrusions that hegin just 
about anywhere and end up nowhere, while destroying everything in their path; to 
curve them would have been enough to preserve precious old buildings. . . . We 
must not accuse him of too much Haussmannization, but of too little. In spite of 
the megalomania of his theories, his vision was, in practice, not large enough. 
Nowhere did he anticipate the future. His vistas lack amplitude; his streets are too 
narrow. His conception is grandiose but not grand; neither is it just or provident." 



d'Espezel, p. 423. 



[E5.4] 



britde." Dubech and d'Espezel, p. 427. 



[E5,6] 



Dubech and d'Espezel, pp. 424-426. 



[E5a,l] 



"If we had to define, in a word, the new spirit that was coming to preside over the 
transformation of Paris, we would have to call it megalomania. The emperor and 
his prefect aim to make Paris the capital not only of France but of the world. . . . 
Cosmopolitan Paris will he the result." Duhech and d'Espezel, p. 404. [E5a,2] 

"Three facts will dominate the project to transform Paris: a strategic fact that 
demands, at the city's center, the break-up of the ancient capital and a new ar- 
rangement of the hub of Paris; a natural fact, the push westward; and a fact 
entailed by the systematic megalomania of the idea of annexing the suburbs." 
Duhech and d'Espezel, p. 406. [E5a,3] 

Jules Ferry, opponent of Haussmann, at the news of the surrender at Sedan: "The 
armies of the emperor are defeated!" Cited in Dubech and d'Espezel, p. 430. 

[E5a,4] 

"Until Haussmann, Paris had been a city of moderate dimensions, where it was 
logical to let experience rule; it developed according to pressures dictated by na- 
ture, according to laws inscribed in the facts of history and in the face of the 
landscape. Brusquely, Haussmann accelerates and crowns the work of revolution- 
ary and imperial centralization. . . . An artificial and inordinate creation, 
emerged like Minerva from the head of Jupiter, born amid the abuse of the spirit of 
authority, this work had need of the spirit of authority in order to develop accord- 
ing to its own logic. No sooner was it born, than it was cut off at the source. . . . 
Here was the paradoxical spectacle of a construction artificial in principle but 
abandoned in fact only to rules imposed by nature." Dubech and d'Espezel, 
pp. 443^44. [E5a,5] 

"Haussmann cut immense gaps right through Paris, and carried out the most 
startling operations. It seemed as if Paris would never endure his surgical experi- 
ments. And yet, today, does it not exist merely as a consequence of his daring and 
courage? His equipment was meager; the shovel, the pick, the wagon, the trowel, 
the wheelbarrow — the simple tools of every race . . . hefore the mechanical age. 
His achievement was truly admirable." Le Corbusier, Urbanisme (Paris <1925>), 
p. 149.' J [E5a,6] 

The mighty seek to secure their position with blood (police), with cunning (fash- 
ion), with magic (pomp). [E5a,7] 

The widening of the streets, it was said, was necessitated by the crinoline. [E5a,8] 

Manner of life among the masons, who often came from Marche or Limousin. (The 
description dates from 1851 — before the great influx of this social stratum in the 
wake of Haussmann's works.) "The masons, whose way of life is more distinct than 
that of other emigrants, belong ordinarily to families of small farmer-householders 
established in the rural townships and provided with individual pasturage, allow- 



Tools used by Haussmaiin's workers. Artist unknown. See E5a,6. 

ing for the maintenance of at least one dairy cow per family. . . . During his so- 
journ in Paris, the mason lives with all the economy that is consistent with an 
unmarried situation; his provisions . . . come to approximately thirty-eight francs 
a month; his lodgings . . . cost only eight francs a month. Workers of the same 
profession ordinarily share a room, where they sleep two by two. This chamber is 
barely heated; it is lit by means of a tallow candle, which the lodgers take turns in 
buying. . . . Having reached the age of forty-five, the mason . . . henceforth re- 
mains on his property to cultivate it liimself. . . . This way of life forms a marked 
contrast to that of the sedentary population; nevertheless, after some years, it 
tends visibly to alter. . . . Thus, during his stay in Paris, the young mason shows 
himself more willing than before to contract illegitimate unions, to spend money on 
clothing, and to frequent various gathering places and places of pleasure. As he 
becomes less capable of elevating himself to the condition of proprietor, he finds 



himself more susceptible to feelings of jealousy toward the upper classes of society. 
This depravity, to which he succumbs far from the influence of his family, . . . and 
in which the love of gain develops without the counterweight of religious sentiment, 
leads sometimes to the sort of coarseness found . . . among the sedentary workers 
of Paris." F. Le Play, Les Ouvriers europeens (Paris, 1855), p. 277. [E6,l] 

On the politics of finance under Napoleon III: "The financial policy of the Empire 
has been consistently guided by two main concerns: to compensate for the in- 
sufficiency of normal revenues and to multiply the construction projects that keep 
capital moving and provide jobs. The trick was to borrow without opening the 
ledger and to undertake a great number of works without immediately overloading 
the budget. . . . Thus, in the space of seventeen years, the imperial government has 
had to procure for itself, in addition to the natural products of taxation, a sum of 
four billion three hundred twenty-two million francs. With the gathering of this 
enormous subsidy, whether by direct loans (on which it was necessary to pay 
interest) or by putting to work available capital (on which revenues were lost), 
there has resulted from these extra-budgetary operations an increase of debts and 
liabilities for the state." Andre Cochut, Operations et tendances financieres du 
Second Empire (Paris, 1868), pp. 13, 20-21. [E6,2] 

Already at the time of the June Insurrection, "they broke through walls so as to be 
able to pass from one house to another." Sigmund Englander, Geschichte der 
franz6sischenArbeiter-Associationen(Hamburg, 1864), vol. 2, p. 287. [E6,3] 

"In 1852, . . . being a Bonapartist opened up all the pleasures in the world. It was 
these people who, humanly speaking, were the most avid for life; therefore, they 
conquered. Zola was agitated and amazed at this thought; suddenly, here was the 
formula for those men who, each in his own way and from his own vantage point, 
had founded an empire. Speculation (chief of the vital functions of this empire), 
unbridled self -enrichment, pleasure seeking — all three were glorified theatrically 
in exhibitions and festivals, which by degrees took on the aspect of a Babylon. And 
along with these brilliant masses taking part in the apotheosis, close behind 
them, . . . the obscure masses who were awaking and moving to the forefront." 
Heinrich Mann, Geist und Tat (Berlin, 1931), p. 167 ("Zola"). [E6a,l] 

Around 1837, Dupin, in the Galerie Colbert, issued a series of colored lithographs 
(signed Pruche <?>, 1837) representing the theatergoing public in various postures. 
A few plates in the series: Spectators in High Spirits, Spectators Applauding, 
Spectators Intriguing, Spectators Accompanying the Orchestra, Attentive Spec- 
tators, Weeping Spectators. [E6a,2] 

Beginnings of city planning in Boissel's Discours contre les servitudes publiques 
<Discourse against Public Easements> of 1786: "Since the natural community of 
goods has been broken up and distributed, every individual property owner has 
built as he pleases. In the past, the social order would not have suffered from this 



trend, but now that urban construction proceeds at the entire discretion, and to 
the entire advantage, of the owners, there is no longer any consideration at all for 
the security, health, or comfort of society. This is particularly the case in Paris, 
where churches and palaces, boulevards and walkways are built in abundance, 
while housing for the great majority of inhabitants is relegated to the shadows. 
Boissel describes in graphic detail the filth and perils that threaten the poor pedes- 
trian on the streets of Paris. . . . To this miserable arrangement of streets he now 
turns his attention, and he effectively solves the problem by proposing to trans- 
form the ground floors of houses into airy arcades, which would offer protection 
from the vehicles and the weather. He thus anticipates Bellamy's idea of 'one 
umbrella over all heads.'" 10 C. Hugo, "Der Sozialismus in Frankreich wahrend 
der grossen Revolution," part 1, "Francois Boissel," Die neue Zeit, 11, no. 1 
(Stuttgart, 1893), p. 813. [E6a,3] 

On Napoleon III around 1851: "He is a socialist with Proudhon, a reformer with 
Girardin, a reactionary with Thiers, a moderate republican with the supporters of 
the republic, and an enemy of democracy and revolution with the legitimists. He 
promises everything and subscribes to everything." Friedrich Szarvady, Paris, 
vol. 1 [the only volume to appear] (Berlin, 1852), p. 401. [E6a,4] 

"Louis Napoleon, . . . this representative of the lumpenproletariat and of every 
type of fraud and knavery, slowly draws ... all power to himself. . . . With glad 
elan, Daumier reemerges. He creates the brilliant figure of Ratapoil, an audacious 
pimp and charlatan. And this ragged marauder, with his murderous cudgel for- 
ever concealed behind his back, becomes for Daumier the embodiment of the 
downfallen Bonapartist idea." Fritz Th. Schulte, "Honore Daumier," Die neue 
Zeit, 32, no. 1 (Stuttgart <1913-1914>), p. 835. [E7,l] 

With reference to the transformation of the city: "Nothing less than a compass is 
required, if you are to find your way." Jacques Fabien, Paris en songe (Paris, 
1863), p. 7. [E7,2] 

The following remark, by way of contrast, throws an interesting light on Paris: 
"Where money, industry, and riches are present, there are facades; the houses 
have assumed faces that serve to indicate the differences in class. In London, more 
than elsewhere, the distances are pitilessly marked. ... A proliferation of ledges, 
bow windows, cornices, columns — so many columns! The column is nobility." 
FernandLeger, "Londres," Lit, 5, no. 23 (June 7, 1935), p. 18. [E7,3] 

The distant native of the age-old Marais 

Rarely sets foot in the Quartier d'Antin, 

And from Menilmontant, calm lookout point, 

He surveys Paris as from a height; 

His thrift and frugality won't let him budge 

From this spot where the gods have dropped him. 



[Leon Gozlan,] Le Triomphe des omnibus: Poeme hero'i-comique (Paris, 1828), 
p. 7. [E7,4] 



"Hundreds of thousands of families, who work in the center of the capital, sleep in 
the outskirts. This movement resembles the tide: in the morning the workers 
stream into Paris, and in the evening the same wave of people flows out. It is a 
melancholy image. ... I would add . . . that it is the lirst time that humanity has 
assisted in a spectacle so dispiriting for the people." A. Granveau, L'Ouvrier 
devant la societe (Paris, 1868), p. 63 ("Les Logements a Paris"). [E7,5] 

July 27, 1830: "Outside the school, men in shirtsleeves were already rolling casks; 
others brought in paving stones and sand by wheelbarrow; a barricade was be- 
gun." G. Pinet, Histoire de VEcole polytechnique (Paris, 1887), p. 142. [E7a,l] 

1833: "The plan to surround Paris with a belt of fortifications . . . aroused pas- 
sionate interest at this time. It was argued that detached forts would be useless for 
the defense of the interior, and threatening only to the population. The opposition 
was universal. . . . Steps were taken to organize a large popular demonstration on 
July 27. Informed of these preparations . . . , the government abandoned the proj- 
ect. . . . Nevertheless, ... on the day of the review, numerous cries of 'Down with 
the forts!' echoed in advance of the procession: i A bas les forts detaches! A bas les 
bastilles!'" G. Pinet, Histoire de VEcole polytechnique (Paris, 1887), pp. 214-215. 
The government ministers took their revenge with the affair of the "Gunpowder 
Conspiracy." 11 [E7a,2] 

Engravings from 1830 show how the insurgents threw all sorts of furniture down 
on the troops from out of the windows. This was a feature especially of the battles 
on the Rue Saint- Antoine. Cabinet des Estampes. [E7a,3] 

Rattier invokes a dream Paris, which he calls "the false Paris" — as distinguished 
from the real one: "the purer Paris, . . . the truer Paris, . . . the Paris that doesn't 
exist" (p. 99): "It is grand, at this moment in time, to set well-guarded Babylon 
walzing in the arms of Memphis, and to set London dancing in the embrace of 
Peking. . . . One of these fine mornings, France will have a rude awakening when it 
realizes it is confined within the walls of Lutetia, of which she forms but a cross- 
roads. . . . The next day, Italy, Spain, Denmark, and Russia will be incorporated 
by decree into the Parisian municipality; three days later, the city gates will be 
pushed back to Novaya Zemlya and to the Land of the Papuans. Paris will be the 
world, and the universe will be Paris. The savannahs and the pampas and the 
Black Forest will compose the public gardens of this greater Lutetia; the Alps, the 
Pyrenees, the Andes, the Himalayas will be the Aventine and the scenic bills of this 
incomparable city — knolls of pleasure, study, or solitude. But all this is still noth- 
ing: Paris will mount to the skies and scale the firmament of firmaments; it will an- 
nex, as suburbs, the planets and the stars." Paul-Ernest de Rattier, Paris n 'existe 



pas (Paris, 1857), pp. 47-49. These early fantasies should he compared with the 
satires on Haussmann published ten years later. [E7a,4] 

% Already Rattier assigns to his false Paris "a unique and simple system of traffic 

tS control that links geometrically, and in parallel lines, all the avenues of this false 

^ Paris to a single center, the Tuileries — this being an admirable method of defense 

| and of maintaining order." Paul-Ernest de Rattier, Paris n'existe pas (Paris, 

« 1857), p. 55. [E8,l] 

§ 

"The false Paris has the good taste to recognize that nothing is more useless or 
moreimmoral than a riot. Though it may gain the upper hand for a few minutes, it 
is quelled for several centuries. Instead of occupying itself with politics, ... it is 
peaceably absorbed in questions of economy. ... A prince who is against fraud 
[J ... knows . . . very well . . . that gold, a great deal of gold, is required ... on our 

planet to build a stepladder to the sky." Paul-Ernest de Rattier, Paris n 'existe pas 
(Paris, 1857), pp. 62, 66-67. [E8,2] 



July Revolution: "Fewer were felled ... by bullets than by other projectiles. The 
large squares of granite with which Paris is paved were dragged up to the top fl oors 
of the houses and dropped on the heads of the soldiers. " Friedrich von Raumer, 
Briefe aus Paris und Frankreich im Jahre 1830 (Leipzig <1831>), vol. 2, p. 145. 

[E8,3] 



Report of a third party, in Raumer's book: "I saw a group of Swiss, who had been 
kneeling and begging for their lives, killed amid jeering, and I saw the stripped 
bodies of the gravely wounded thrown contemptuously onto the barricades to 
make them higher." Friedrich von Raumer, Briefe aus Paris und Frankreich in 
Jahre 1830 (Leipzig, 1831), vol. 2, p. 256. [E8,4] 



Descriptions of barricades of 1830: Ch. Motte, Revolutions tie Paris, 1830: Plan 
figuratif'des barricades ainsi que des positions et mouvements des citoyens armes 
et des trou pes (published by the author <Paris, 1830>). [E8,5] 



Caption for a plate in Les Ruines de Paris: 100 photographies, by A. Liebert 
(Paris, 1871), vol. 1: "Barricade of the Federates, Constructed by Gaillard 
Senior." [E8,6] 



"When the emperor . . . enters his capital, the fifty horses of his carriage are at a 
gallop; between the Gateway of Paris and his Louvre, he pauses under two thou- 
sand triumphal arches and passes before fifty colossi erected in his image. . . . And 
this idolizing of the sovereign by his subjects causes some dismay among the latter- 
day pious, to whom it occurs that their idols were never recipients of such hom- 
age. 1 ' Arsene Houssaye, "Le Paris futur"; in (Dumas, Gautier, Houssaye, and 
others,> Paris et les Parisiens au XIX" siecle (Paris, 1856), p. 469. [E8,7] 



High daily allowances for the deputies under Napoleon TIL 



[E8,8] 



"The 4,054 barricades of the 'Three Glorious Days' were made from . . . 
8,125,000 paving stones." Le Romantisme [Exhibition catalogue (at the Bih- 
liotheque Nationale), January 22-March 10, 1930; explanatory note to no. 635, 
A. de Grandsagne and M. Plant, Revolution de 1830, plan des combats de Paris], 

[E8,9] 

"When, last year, thousands of workers marched through the streets of the capital 
in a menacing calm; when, at a time of peace and commercial prosperity, they 
interrupted the course of their work . . . , the government's first responsibility was 
to take forceful measures against a disturbance that was all the more dangerous 
for not knowing itself as such." L. de Carne, "Publications democratiques et 
communistes," Revue des deux mondes, 27 (Paris, 1841), p. 746. [E8a,l] 

"What fate does the present movement of society have in store for architecture? 
Let us look around us. . . . Ever more monuments, ever more palaces. On all sides 
rise up great stone blocks, and everything tends toward the solid, the heavy, the 
vulgar; the genius of art is imprisoned by such an imperative, in which the imagi- 
nation no longer has any room to play, can no longer be great, but rather is 
exhausted in representing . . . the tiered orders on fagades and in decorating 
friezes and the borders of window frames. In the interior, one finds still more of 
the court, more of the peristyle, . . . with the little rooms more and more confined, 
the studies and boudoirs exiled to the niches under the spiral staircase, . . . where 
they constitute pigeonholes for people; it is the cellular system applied to the 
family group. The problem becomes how, in a given space, to make use of the least 
amount of materials and to pack in the greatest number of people (while isolating 
them all from one another). . . . This tendency — indeed, this fait accompli — is the 
result of progressive subdividing. ... In a word, each for himself and each by 
himself has increasingly become the guiding principle of society, while the public 
wealth ... is scattered and squandered. Such are the causes, at this moment in 
France, for the demise of monumentally scaled residential architecture. For pri- 
vate habitations, as they become narrower, are able to sustain but a narrow art. 
The artist, lacking space, is reduced to making statuettes and easel paintings. . . . 
In the presently emerging conditions of society, art is driven into an impasse where 
it suffocates for lack of air. It is already suffering the effects of this new norm of 
limited artistic facility, which certain souls, supposedly advanced, seem to regard 
as the goal of their philanthropy. ... In architecture, we do not make art for art's 
sake; we do not raise monuments for the sole purpose of occupying the imagination 
of architects and furnishing work for painters and sculptors. What is necessary, 
then, is to apply the monumental mode of construction ... to all the elements of 
human dwelling. We must make it possihle not only for a few privileged individuals 
but for all people to live in palaces. And if one is to occupy a palace, one should 
properly live there together with others, in bonds of association .... Where art is 
concerned, therefore, it is only the association of all elements of the community 



that can launch the immense development we are outlining." D. Laverdant, De la 
mission de Vart et du role des artistes: Salon de 1845 (Paris, 1845), from the 
offices of La. Phalange, pp. 13-15. [E8a,2] 



"For some time now, . . . there have heen efforts to discover where this word 
boulevard could have come from. As for me, I am finally satisfied as to the etymol- 
ogy: it is merely a variant of the word bouleversement <commotion, upheavals" 
Edouard Fournier, Chroniques et legendes des rues de Paris (Paris, 1864), p. 16. 

[E9,l] 

"Monsieur Picard, attorney for the city of Paris, . . . has energetically defended 
the interests of the city. What he has heen presented with in the way of antedated 
leases at the moment of expropriations, what he has had to contend with in order 
to nullify fantastic titles and reduce the claims of the expropriated is almost he- 
yond helief. A collier for the city one day placed before him a lease, antedated 
some years, on paper hearing official stamps. The simple man helieved himself 
already in possession of a weighty sum for his shanty. But he did not know that this 
paper bore, in its watermark, the date of its manufacture. The attorney raised it to 
the light; it had been made three years after the date stamped." Auguste Lepage, 
Les Cafes politiques et litteraires de Paris (Paris <1874>), p. 89. [E9>2] 

Observations on the physiology of the uprising, in Niepovie's book: "Nothing has 
changed on the surface, hut there is something unusual in the air. The cabriolets, 
omnibuses, and hackney coaches seem to have quickened their pace, and the 
drivers keep turning their heads as though someone were after them. There are 
more groups standing around than is usual. . . . People look at one another with 
anxious interrogation in their eyes. Perhaps this urchin or this worker hastening 
by will know something; and he is stopped and questioned. What's going on? ask 
the passersby. And the urchin or the worker responds, with a smile of utter indif- 
ference, 'They are gathering at the Place de la Bastille,' or 'They are gathering 
near the Temple' (or somewhere else), and then hurries off to wherever they are 
gathering. . . . On the sites themselves, the scene is pretty much as he said: the 
population has massed to such an extent that you can hardly get through. The 
pavement is strewn with sheets of paper. What is it? A proclamation of he 
Moniteur republicain, which dates from the Year 50 of the one and indivisible 
French republic. People have gathered, you are told, to discuss the proclamation. 
The shops have not yet been closed; shots have not yet been fired. . . . Now then, 
behold the saviors. . . . All of a sudden, the holy battalion has halted before a 
house, and, just as quicldy, the third-story windows are thrown open and packets 
of cartridges rain down. . . . The distribution is accomplished in the twinkling of 
an eye and, with that, the battalion is dispatched on the run — a portion to one 
side, a portion to the other. . . . Vehicles are no longer passing on the streets; there 
is less noise. And that's why one can hear, if I do not deceive myself . . . Listen, 
they're beating the drum. It is the call to arms. The authorities are roused." 



Gaetan Niepovie, Etudes physiologiques sur les grandes metro poles de I'Europe 
occidental: Paris (Paris, 1840), pp. 201-204, 206. [E9,3] 



A barricade: "At the entrance to a narrow street, an omnibus lies with its four 
wheels in the air. A pile of crates, which had served perhaps to hold oranges, rises 
to the right and to the left, and behind them, between the rims of the wheels and 
the openings, small fires are blazing, continually emitting small blue clouds of 
smoke." Gaetan Niepovie, Etudes physiologiques sur les grandes metropoles de 
I'Europe occidentale: Paris (Paris, 1840), p. 207. [E9a,l] 

1868: death of Meryon. [E9a,2] 

"It has been said that Charlet and Raffet by themselves prepared the way for the 
Second Empire in France." Henri Bouchot, La Lithographie (Paris <1895>), 
pp. 8-9. [E9a,3] 

From Arago's letter on the encirclement of Paris (Associations Nationales en 
Faveur de la Presse Patriote) [extract from he National of July 21, 1833]: "All the 
projected forts, with regard to distance, would give access to the most populous 
districts of the capital" (p. 5). "Two of the forts, those of Italie and Passy, would be 
enough to set fire to all sections of Paris on the Left Bank of the Seine; . . . two 
others, Fort Philippe and Fort Saint-Chaumont, could cover the rest of the city 
with their circle of fire" (p. 8). [E9a,4] 

In Le Figaro of April 27, <1936,> Gaetan Sanvoisin cites this remark by Maxime 
Du Camp: "If there were only Parisians in Paris, there would be no revolutionar- 
ies." Compare with similar statements by Haussmann. [E9a,5] 

"A one-act play by Engels, written in haste and performed in September 1847 at 
the German Alliance for Workers in Brussels, already represented a battle on the 
barricades in a German petty state — a battle which ended with the abdication of 
the prince and the proclamation of a republic." Gustav Mayer, Friedrich Engels, 
vol. 1, Friedrich Engels in seiner Friihzeit, 2nd ed. (Berlin <1933>), p. 269. 12 

[E9a,6] 

During the suppression of the June Insurrection, artillery came to be used for the 
first time in street fighting. [E9a,7] 

Haussmann's attitude toward the Parisian population recalls that of Guizot to- 
ward the proletariat. Guizot characterized the proletariat as the "external popula- 
tion." (See Georgi Plekhanov, "Uber die Anfange der Lehre vom Klassenkampf," 
Die neue £eit, 21, no. 1 (Stuttgart, 1903), p. 285. [E9a,8] 

The building of barricades appears in Fourier as an example of "nonsalaried but 
impassioned work." [E9a,9] 



The practice of bamboozling the municipal expropriations committee became an 
industry under Haussmann. "Small traders and shopkeepers . . . would be sup- 
plied with false books and inventories, and, when necessary, their premises would 
(it turned out) be newly redecorated and refurnished; while during the visit of the 
committee to the premises, a constant stream of unexpected customers would pour 
in." S. Kracauer, Jacques Offenbach und das Paris seiner Zeit (Amsterdam, 
1937), p. 254. 13 [E10.1] 



City planning in Fourier: "Each avenue, each street, should open onto some par- 
ticular prospect, whether the countryside or a public monument. The custom of 
civilized nations — where streets come to an end with a wall, as in fortresses, or 
with a heap of earth, as in the newer sections of Marseilles- — should be avoided. 
Every house that faces the street should be obliged to have ornamentation of the 
first class, in the gardens as well as on the buildings." Charles Fourier, Cites 
ouvrieres: Des modifications a introduire dans V architecture des villes <extracts 
from La Phalange> (Paris, 1849), p. 27. [E10.2] 



In connection with Haussmann: "The mythic structure develops rapidly: opposing 
the vast city is the legendary hero destined to conquer it. In fact, there are hardly 
any works of the period that do not contain some invocation inspired by the 
capital, and the celebrated cry of Rastignac" is of unusual simplicity. . . . The 
heroes of Ponson du Terrail are more lyrical in their inevitable apostrophe to the 
'modern Babylon' (this is always the name used for Paris). See, for example, that 
... of the . . . false Sir Williams in the novel he Club des Valets de coeur: '0 Paris, 
Paris! You are the true Babylon, the true arena of intellectual hattle, the true 
temple where evil has its cult and its priesthood; and I am sure that the breath of 
the archangel of shadows passes over you eternally, like the winds over the infinity 
of the seas. 0 motionless tempest, ocean of stone, I want to be that dark eagle 
which, amid your angry waves, disdains the lightning and sleeps cheerfully on the 
thunderstorm, his great wing extended. I want to be the genius of evil, the vulture 
of the seas, of this most perfidious and tempestuous sea on which the human 
passions toss and unfurl.'" Roger Caillois, "Paris, mythe moderne," Nouvelle 
Revuefrancaise, 25, no. 284 (May 1, 1937), p. 686. [E10.3] 



Blanquist revolt of May 12, 1839: "He had waited a week to profit from the instal- 
lation of new troops unfamiliar with the maze of Paris streets. The thousand men 
on whom he counted for the engagement were supposed to assemble hetween the 
Rue Saint-Denis and the Rue Saint-Martin. . . . Under a magnificent sun ... to- 
ward three in the afternoon, in the midst of a hurgeoning Sunday crowd, the 
revolutionary hand all at once musters and appears. Immediately a vacuum, a 
silence, sets in around them." Gustave Geffroy, L'Enferme (Paris, 1926), vol. 1, 
pp. 81-82. [ElOa.l] 



In 1830, rope was used, among other things, to harricade the streets. 



[E10a,2] 



Rastignac's famous challenge (cited in Messac (he "Detective Novel" et I'influence 
tie la pensee scientifique [Paris, 1929]>, pp. 419—420): "Eugene, now alone, 
walked a few steps to the topmost part of the graveyard. He saw Paris, spread 
windingly along the two banks of the Seine. Lights were beginning to twinkle. His 
gaze fixed itself almost avidly on the space between the column in the Place 
Vendome and the cupola of Les Invalides. There lived the world into which he had 
wished to penetrate. He fastened on the murmurous hive a look that seemed al- 
ready to be sucking the honey from it, and uttered these words: 'Now I'm ready 
for you!'" 15 [E10a,3] 

To the theses of Haussmann corresponds the tahulation of Du Camp, according to 
which the population of Paris during the Commune was 75.5 percent foreigners 
and provincials. [E10a,4] 

For the Blanquist putsch of August 14, 1870, 300 revolvers and 400 heavy dag- 
gers were made available. It is characteristic of the street fighting in this period 
that the workers preferred daggers to revolvers. [E10a,5] 

Kauf mann places attheheadof his chapter entitled "Architectural Autonomy" an 
epigraph from he Contrat social: "a form ... in which each is united with all, yet 
obeys only himself and remains as free as before. — Such is the fundamental prob- 
lem that the social contract solves" (p. 42). 16 In this chapter (p. 43): "[Ledoux] 
justifies the separation of the buildings in the second project for Chaux with the 
words: 'Return to principle. . . . Consult nature; man is everywhere isolated' (Ar- 
chitecture, p. 70). The feudal principle of prerevolutionary society . . . can have 
no further validity now. . . . The autonomously grounded form of every object 
makes all striving after theatrical effect appear senseless. ... At a stroke, it would 
seem, . . . the Baroque art of the prospect disappears from sight." E. Kaufmann, 
Von Ledoux bis he Corbusier (Vienna and Leipzig, 1933), p. 43. [E10a,6] 

"The renunciation of the picturesque has its architectural equivalent in the refusal 
of all prospect-art. A highly significant symptom is the sudden diffusion of the 
silhouette. . . . Steel engraving and wood engraving supplant the mezzotint, which 
had Hourished in the Baroque age. ... To anticipate our conclusions, ... let it be 
said that the autonomous principle retains its efficacy ... in the first decades after 
the architecture of the Revolution, becoming ever weaker with the passage of time 
until, in the later decades of the nineteenth century, it is virtually unrecogniz- 
able." Emil Kaufmann, Von hedoux bis he Corbusier (Vienna and Leipzig, 1933), 
pp. 47, 50. [El 1,1] 

Napoleon Gaillard: builder of the mighty barricade that, in 1871, stood at the 
entrance of the Rue Royale and the Rue de Rivoli. [El 1 ,2] 



"At the corner of the Rue de la Chaussee-d'Antin and the Rue Basse-du-Rampart, 
there sits a house that is remarkable for the caryatids on the facade facing the Rue 



Basse-du-Rampart. Because this latter street must disappear, the magnificent 
house with the caryatids, built only twenty years ago, is going to be demolished. 
The jury for expropriations grants the three million francs demanded by the 
owner and approved by the city. Three million! What a useful and productive 
expenditure!" Auguste Blanqui, Critique sociale, vol. 2, Fragments et notes 
(Paris, 1885), p. 341. [Ell,3] 

"Against Paris. Obdurate scheme to clear out the city, to disperse its population of 
workers. Hypocritically — on a humanitarian pretext — they propose to redistrib- 
ute throughout the 38,000 townships of France the 75,000 workers affected by 
unemployment. 1849." Blanqui, Critique sociale, vol. 2, Fragments et notes 
(Paris, 1885), p. 313. [El 1,4] 

"A Monsieur d'Havrincourt recently expounded on the strategic theory of civil 
war. The troops must never be allowed to spend much time in the main areas of 
disturbance. They are corrupted by contact with the rebels and refuse to fire 
freely when repression becomes necessary. . . . The best system: construct citadels 
dominating the suspect towns and ready at any moment to crush them. Soldiers 
must be kept garrisoned, away from the popular contagion." Auguste Blanqui, 
Critique sociale, vol. 2 (Paris, 1885), pp. 232-233 ("Saint-Etienne, 1850"). 

[E11.5] 

"The Haussmanization of Paris and the provinces is one of the great plagues of the 
Second Empire. No one will ever know how many thousands of unfortunates have 
lost their lives as a consequence of deprivations occasioned by these senseless 
constructions. The devouring of so many millions is one the principal causes of the 
present distress. . . . 'When building goes well, everything goes well,' runs a popu- 
lar adage, which has attained the status of economic axiom. By this standard, a 
hundred pyramids of Cheops, rising together into the clouds, would attest to 
overflowing prosperity. Singular calculus. Yes, in a well-ordered state, where 
thrift did not strangle exchange, construction would be the true measure of public 
fortune. For then it would reveal a growth in population and an excess of labor 
that . . . would lay a foundation for the future. In any other circumstances, the 
trowel merely betrays the murderous fantasies of absolutism, which, when its fury 
for war momentarily slackens, is seized by the fury for building. . . . All merce- 
nary tongues have been loosed in a chorus of celebration for the great works that 
are renewing the face of Paris. Nothing so sad, so lacking in social spontaneity, as 
this vast shifting of stones by the hand of despotism. There is no more dismal 
symptom of decadence. In proportion as Rome collapsed in agony, its monuments 
grew more numerous and more colossal. It was building its own sepulcher and 
making ready to die gloriously. But as for the modern world — it has no wish to die, 
and human stupidity is nearing its end. People are weary of grandiose homicidal 
acts. The projects that have so disrupted the capital, conditioned as they are on 
repression and vanity, have failed the future no less than the present." A. Blanqui, 



Critique sociale, vol. 1, Capital et travail (Paris, 1885), pp. 109-111 (conclusion 
of "Le Luxe"). The foreword to Capital et travail is dated May 26, 1869. 

[Ella,l] 



"The illusions about the fantastic structures are dispelled. Nowhere are there 
materials other than the hundred simple bodies. ... It is with this meager assort- 
ment that the universe is necessarily made and remade, without respite. M. Hauss- 
mann had just as much to rebuild Paris with; he had precisely these materials. Itis 
not variety that stands out in his constructions. Nature, which also demolishes in 
order to reconstruct, does a little better with the things it creates. It knows how to 
make such good use of its meager resources that one hesitates to say there is a limit 
to the originality of its works." A. Blanqui, L'Eternite par les astres: Hypothese 
astronomique (Paris, 1872), p. 53. [Ella, 2] 

Die neue Weltbiihne, 34, no. 5 (February 3, 1938), in an essay by H. Budzislawski, 
"Croesus Builds" (pp. 129-130), quotes Engels' "Zur Wohnungsfrage" <On the 
Housing Question) of 1872: "In reality the bourgeoisie has only one method of 
settling the housing question after its fashion — that is to say, of settling it in such a 
way that the solution continually poses the question anew. This method is called 
'Haussmann.' By the term 'Haussmann,' I do not mean merely the specifically 
Bonapartist manner of the Parisian Haussmann — cutting long, straight, broad 
streets right through closely built working-class neighborhoods and lining them 
on both sides with big luxurious buildings, the intention having been, apart from 
the strategic aim of making barricade fighting more difficult, to develop a spe- 
cifically Bonapartist building-trades proletariat dependent on the govermnent, 
and to turn the city into a luxury city pure and simple. By 'Haussmann' I mean 
the practice, which has now become general, of making breaches in the working- 
class neighborhoods of our big cities, particularly in those which are centrally 
situated. . . . The result is everywhere the same: the most scandalous alleys . . . 
disappear to the accompaniment of lavish self-glorification by the bourgeoi- 
sie ... , but — they reappear at once somewhere else, often in the immediate 
neighborhood." 17 — With this goes the prize question: Why was the mortality rate 
in London so much higher in the new working-class districts (around 1890?) 
than in the slums? — Because people went hungry so that they could afford the 
high rents. And Peladan's observation: the nineteenth century forced everyone to 
secure lodgings for himself, even at the cost of food and clothing. [E12,l] 

Is it true, as Paul Westheim maintains in his article "Die neue Siegesallee" {Die 
neue Weltbiihne, 34, no. 8, p. 240), that Haussmann spared Parisians the misery of 
large blocks of fiats? [E12,2] 



Haussmann who, faced with the city plan of Paris, takes up Rastignac's cry of "A 
nous deux maintenant!" [E12,3] 



"The new boulevards have introduced light and air into unwholesome districts, 
but have done so by wiping out, along their way, almost all the courtyards and 
gardens — which moreover have been ruled out by the progressive rise in real 
estate prices." Victor Fournel, Paris nouveau et Paris futur (Paris, 1868), p. 224 
("Conclusion"). [E12,4] 

The old Paris bewails the monotony of the new streets; whereupon the new Paris 
responds: 

Why all these reproaches? , . . 

Thanks to the straight line, the ease of travel it affords, 

One avoids the shock of many a vehicle, 

And, if one's eyes are good, one likewise avoids 

The fools, the borrowers, the bailiffs, the bores; 

Last but not least, down the whole length of the avenue, 

Each passerby now avoids the others, or nods from afar. 

M. Barthelemy, Le Vieux Paris et le nouveau (Paris, 1861), pp. 5-6. [E12a,l] 

The old Paris: "The rent devours all, and they go without meat." M. Barthelemy, 
Le Vieux Paris et le nouveau. (Paris, 1861), p. 8. [E12a,2] 

Victor Fournel, in his Paris nouveau et Paris futur (Paris, 1868), particularly in 
the section "Un chapitre des mines de Paris moderne," gives an idea of the scale 
on which Haussmann engineered destruction in Paris . "Modern Paris is a parvenu 
that goes back no further in time than its own beginnings , and that razes the old 
palaces and old churches to build in their place beautiful white houses with stucco 
ornaments and pasteboard statues. In the previous century, to write the annals of 
the monuments of Paris was to write the annals of Paris itself, from its origins up 
through each of its epochs; soon, however, it will be . . . merely to write the annals 
of the last twenty years of our own existence" (pp. 293-294). [E12a,3] 

Fournel, in his eminent demonstration of Haussmann's misdeeds: "From the Fau- 
bourg Saint-Germain to the Fauhourg Saint-Honore, from the Latin Quarter to 
the environs of the Palais-Royal, from the Faubourg Saint-Denis to the Chaussee 
d'Antin, from the Boulevard des Italiens to the Boulevard du Temple, it seemed, 
in each case, that you were passing from one continent to another. It all made for 
so many distinct small cities within the capital city — a city of study, a city of 
commerce, a city of luxury, a city of refuge, a city of movement and of popular 
pleasures— all of them nonetheless linked to one another by a host of gradations 
and transitions. And this is what is being obliterated ... by the construction 
everywhere of the same geometrical and rectilinear street, with its unvarying mile- 
long perspective and its continuous rows of houses that are always the same 
house.''' Victor Fournel, Paris nouveau et Paris futur, pp. 220-221 ("Con- 
clusion"). [E12a,4] 



"They . . . transplant the Boulevard des Italiens in its entirety to the Montagne 
Sainte-Genevieve — with about as much utility and profit as a hothouse flower in 
the forest — and they create Rues de Rivoli in the ancient city center, which has no 
need of them. Eventually this cradle of the capital, having been demolished, will 
comprise at most a barracks, a church, a hospital, and a palace." Victor Fournel, 
Paris nouveau et Paris futur (Paris, 1868), p. 223. The last thought echoes a 
stanza from Hugo's "A l'Arc. de Triomphe." [E13,l] 

Haussmann's work is accomplished today, as the Spanish war makes clear, by 
quite other means. [E13,2] 

Temporary tenants under Haussmann: "The industrial nomads among the new 
ground-floor Parisians fall into three principal categories: commercial photogra- 
phers; dealers in bric-a-brac, who run bazaars and cheap shops; and exhibitors of 
curiosities, particularly of female giants. Up to now, these interesting personages 
have numbered among those who have profited the most from the transformation 
of Paris." Victor Fournel, Paris nouveau et Parisfutur (Paris, 1868), pp. 129-130 
("Promenade pittoresque a travers le nouveau Paris"). [E13,3] 

"The covered market of Les Halles, by universal consent, constitutes the most 
irreproachable construction of the past dozen years. ... It manifests one of those 
logical harmonies which satisfy the mind by the obviousness of its signification." 
Victor Fournel, Paris nouveau et Parisfutur, p. 213. [E13,4] 

Already Tissot invites speculation: "The city of Paris is supposed to make a series 
of loans totaling hundreds of millions of francs and, at the same time, purchase the 
better part of a quartier in order to rebuild it in a manner conforming to the re- 
quirements of taste, hygiene, and ease of communication. Here is matter 
for speculation." Amedee de Tissot, Paris et Londres compares (Paris, 1830), 



In Le Passe, le present, I'avenir de la Republique (Paris, 1850), p. 31 (cited in 
<Jean> Cassou, Quarante-huit <Paris, 1939>, pp. 174—175), Lamartine already 
speaks of the "nomadic, indecisive, and dissolute city dwellers who are corrupted 
by their idleness in public places and who go whichever way the wind of factional- 



Stahl on the Parisian tenement houses: "It was already [in the Middle Ages] an 
overpopulated metropolis that was squeezed within the tight belt of a walled for- 
tification. For the mass of people, there were neither single-family houses nor 
separately owned houses nor even modest cottages. Buildings of many stories were 
erected on the narrowest of lots, generally allowing only two, often only one, front 
window (though elsewhere three-window houses were the rule). These buildings 
usually remained wholly unadorned, and when they did not simply come to a stop 



pp. 46-47. 



[E13,5] 



ism blows, heeding the voice of him who shouts the loudest. 



[E13a,l] 



at the top, there was at most a single gable affixed there. . . . On the roofs, the 
situation was strange enough, with unassumijig superstructures and mansardes 
nestled next to the chimney flues, which were placed extremely close to one an- 
other." Stahl sees, in the freedom of the roofing structures — a freedom to which 
modern architects in Paris likewise adhere — "a fantastic and thoroughly Gothic 
element." Fritz Stahl, Paris (Berlin <1929>), pp. 79-80. [E13a,2] 

"Everywhere . . . the peculiar chimneys serve only to heighten the disorder of 
these forms [the mansardes]. This is ... a trait common to all Parisian houses. 
Even the oldest of them have that high wall from which the tops of the chimney 
flues extend. . . . We are far removed here from the Roman style, which has been 
taken to he the foundation of Parisian architecture. We are in fact nearer its 
opposite, the Gothic, to which the chimneys clearly allude. ... If we want to call 
this more loosely a "northern style," then we can see that a second . . . northern 
element is present to mitigate the Roman character of the streets. This is none 
other than the modern boulevards and avenues . . . , which are planted, for the 
most part, with trees; . . . and rows of trees, of course, are a feature of the north- 
ern city." Fritz Stahl, Paris (Berlin), pp. 21-22. [E13a,3] 

In Paris, the modern house has "developed gradually out of the preexisting one. 
This could happen hecause the preexisting one was already a large townhouse of 
the type created here ... in the seventeenth century on the Place Vendome, where 
today the residential palaces of former times have come to harhor business estab- 
lishments of every kind — without having suffered the least alteration to their 
facades." Fritz Stahl, Paris (Berlin), p. 18. [El4] 

A plea for Haussmann: "It is well known that . . . the nineteenth century entirely 
lost, together with other fundamental concepts of art, the concept of the city as . . . 
a unified whole. Henceforth there was no longer any city planning. New huildings 
were introduced into the old network of streets without a plan, and they were 
expanded without a plan. . . . What can properly be called the architectural his- 
tory of a city . . . was in this way everywhere terminated. Paris is the only excep- 
tion, and as such it was greeted with incomprehension and disapproval" 
(pp. 13-14). "Three generations failed to understood what city planning is. We 
know what it is, but in our case this knowledge generally brings only regret for 
missed opportunities. . . . These considerations make it possihle to appreciate the 
only city planner of genius in the modern world — a man, moreover, who indirectly 
created all the American metropolises" (pp. 168-169). "It is solely in this perspec- 
tive, then, that Haussmann's great thoroughfares take on their real meaning. With 
them, the new city . . . intervenes in the old and, in a certain sense, draws on the 
old, without otherwise violating its character. Thus, these thoroughfares may be 
said to have, along with their utility, an aesthetic effect, such that the old city and 
the new are not left standing opposite each other, as is the case everywhere else, 
hut are drawn together into one. The moment you come out of some ancient lane 
onto one of Haussmann's avenues, you're in contact with this newer Paris — the 



Paris of the past three centuries. For Haussmann took over not only the form of 
the avenue and boulevard but also the form of the house from the imperial capital 
laid out by Louis XIV. That is why his streets can perform the function of making 
the city into a conspicuous unity. No, he has not destroyed Paris ; rather, he has 
brought it to completion. . . . This must be acknowledged even when you realize 
how much beauty was sacrificed. . . . Haussmann was assuredly a fanatic — but his 
work could be accomplished only by a fanatic." Fritz Stahl, Paris: Eine Stadt als 
Kunstiverk (Berlin), pp. 173-174. [E14a] 