[Iron Construction] 



Each epoch dreams the one to follow. 

— Michelet, "Avenir! Avenir!" [Europe, 73, p. 6) 



Dialectical deduction of iron construction: it is contrasted both with Greek con- 
struction in stone (raftered ceiling) and with medieval construction in stone 
(vaulted ceiling) . "Another art, in which another static principle establishes a tone 
even more magnificent than that of the other two, will struggle from the womb of 
time to be born. ... A new and unprecedented ceiling system, one that will 
naturally bring in its wake a whole new realm of art forms, can . . . make its 
appearance only after some particular material — formerly neglected, if not un- 
known, as a basic principle in that application — begins to be accepted. Such a 
material is . . . iron, which our century has already started to employ in this 
sense. In proportion as its static properties are tested and made known, iron is 
destined to serve, in the architecture of the future, as the basis for the system of 
ceiling construction; and with respect to statics, it is destined to advance this 
system as far beyond the Hellenic and the medieval as the system of the arch 
advanced the Middle Ages beyond the monolithic stone-lintel system of antiq- 
uity. ... If the static principle of force is thus borrowed from vaulted construc- 
tions and put to work for an entirely new and unprecedented system, then, with 
regard to the art forms of the new system, the formal principle of the Hellenic 
mode must find acceptance." ^um himdertjihrigen Geburtstag Karl Boettichers 
(Berlin, 1906), pp. 42, 44-46. (The principle of Hellenic architecture and Ger- 
manic architecture as carried over into the architecture of our time.) [Fl, 1 ] 

Glass before its time, premature iron. In the arcades, both the most brittle and the 
strongest materials suffered breakage; in a certain sense, they were deflowered. 
Around the middle of the past century, it was not yet known how to build with 
glass and iron. Hence, the light that fell from above, through the panes between 
the iron supports, was dirty and sad. [Fl.2] 

"The mid-1830s see the appearance of the first iron furniture, in the form of 
bedsteads, chairs, small tables, jardinieres; and it is highly characteristic of the 
epoch that this furniture was preferred because it could be made to imitate per- 



fectly any type of wood. Shortly after 1840, fully padded furniture appears in 
France, and with it the upholstered style becomes dominant." Max von Boehn, Die 
Mode im XIX. J ahrhundert, vol. 2 (Munich, 1907), p. 131. [Fl,3] 

The two great advances in technology — gas 1 and cast iron — go together. "Aside 
from the great quantity of lights maintained by the merchants, these galleries are 
illuminated in the evening by thirty-four jets of hydrogen gas mounted on cast- 
iron volutes on the pilasters." The quote is probably referring to the Galerie de 
l'Opera.J. A. Dulaure, Hutoire de Paris . . . depuu 1821 jusqu'a nos jours, vol. 2 
<(Paris, 1835), p. 29>. [Fl,4] 

"The stagecoach gallops up to the quay, by the Seine. A bolt of lightning flashes 
over the Pont d!Austerlitz. The pencil comes to rest." Karl Gutzkow, Brief e aus 
Paris, vol. 2 <Leipzig, 1842>, p. 234. The Austerlitz Bridge was one of the first 
iron structures in Paris. With the lightning flash above, it becomes an emblem of 
the dawning technological age. Close by, the stagecoach with its team of black 
horses, whose hoofs strike romantic sparks. And the pencil of the German author 
who sketches them: a splendid vignette in the style of Grandville. 

[Fl,5] 

"In reality, we know of no beautiful theaters, no beautiful railroad stations, no 
beautiful exhibition halls, no beautiful casinos — that is to say, no beautiful houses 
of industry or of frivolity." Maurice Talmeyr, La Cite du sang (Paris, 1908), 
p. 277. [F1.6] 

Magic of cast iron: "Hahblle 2 was able then to convince himself that the ring 
around this planet was nothing other than a circular balcony on which the inhabi- 
tants of Saturn strolled in the evening to get a breath of fresh air." Grandville, Un 
autre monde (Paris <1844>), p. 139. □ Hashish Q [Fl,7] 

In mentioning factories built in the style of residential houses, and other things of 
this kind, we must take into account the following parallel from the history of 
architecture: "I said earlier that in the period of 'sensibility,' temples were erected 
to friendship and tenderness; as taste subsequently turned to the classical style, a 
host of temples or temple-like buildings immediately sprang up in gardens, in 
parks, on hills. And these were dedicated not only to the Graces or to Apollo and 
the Muses; farm buildings, too, including barns and stables, were built in the 
style of temples." Jacob Falke, Geschichte des modemen Geschmacks (Leipzig, 1866), 
pp. 373-374. There are thus masks of architecture, and in such masquerade the 
architecture of Berlin around 1800 appears on Sundays, like a ghost at a costume 
ball. [Fla,l] 



"Every tradesman imitates the materials and methods of others, and thinks he 
has accomplished a miracle of taste when he brings out porcelain cups resem- 
bling the work of a cooper, glasses resembling porcelains, gold jewelry like leather 



thongs, iron tables with the look of rattan, and so on. Into this arena rushes the 
confectioner as well — quite forgetting his proper domain, and the touchstone of 
his taste — aspiring to be a sculptor and architect." Jacob Falke, Geschichte des 
modernen Geschmacks, p. 380. This perplexity derived in part from the superabun- 
dance of technical processes and new materials that had suddenly become avail- 
able. The effort to assimilate them more thoroughly led to mistakes and failures. 
On the other hand, these vain attempts are the most authentic proof that techno- 
logical production, at the beginning, was in the grip of dreams. (Not architecture 
alone but all technology is, at certain stages, evidence of a collective dream.) 

[Fla,2] 

"With iron construction — a secondary genre, it is true — a new art was horn. The 
east-side railroad station designed by Duquesnay, the Gare de l'Est, was in this 
regard worthy of architects' attention. The use of iron greatly increased in that 
period, thanks to the new combinations to which it lent itself . Two quite different 
but equally remarkable works in this genre deserve to be mentioned first: the 
Bibliotheque Sainte-Genevieve and the cental marketplace, Les Halles. The latter 
is ... a veritable archetype: reproduced several times in Paris and other cities, it 
proceeded, as the Gothic cathedral had done, to appear all over France. . . . Nota- 
hle improvements can be observed in the details. The monumental lead-work has 
become rich and elegant; the railings, candelabras, and mosaic flooring all testify 
to an often successful quest for heauty. Technological advances have made it possi- 
ble to sheathe cast iron with copper, a process which must not he abused. Ad- 
vances in luxury have led, even more successfully, to the replacement of cast iron 
by bronze, something which has turned the streetlamps in certain public places 
into objets d'art." 0 Gas D Note to this passage: "In 1848, 5,763 tons of iron en- 
tered Paris; in 1854, 11,771; in 1862, 41,666; in 1867, 61,572." E. Levasseur, 
Histoire des classes ouvrieres et de Vindustrie en France de 1 789 a 1870, vol. 2 
(Paris, 1904), pp. 531-532. [Fla,3] 

"Henri Labrouste, an artist whose talents are sober and severe, successfully in- 
augurated the ornamental use of iron in the construction of the Bihliotheque 
Sainte-Genevieve and the Bibliotheque Nationale." Levasseur, Histoire des 
classes ouvrieres, p. 197. [Fla,4] 

First construction of Les Halles in 1851, long after the project had been approved 
hy Napoleon in 1811. It met with general disfavor. This stone structure was known 
as lefort de la Halle. "It was an unfortunate attempt which will not be repeated. 
... A mode of construction better suited to the end proposed will now be sought. 
The glassed sections of the Gare de l'Ouest and the memory of the Crystal Palace, 
which had housed the world exhibition at London in 1851, were no doubt respon- 
sible for the idea of using glass and cast iron almost exclusively. Today we can see 
the justification for turning to such lightweight materials, which, better than any 
others, fulfilled the conditions laid down for these establishments. Work on Les 



Halles has not let up since 1851, yet they are still not finished." Maxime Du Camp, 



Plan for a train station intended to replace theGare Saint-Lazare. Corner of Place 
de la Madeleine and Rue Tronchet. "According to the report, the rails — supported 
by 'elegant cast-iron arches rising twenty feet above the ground, and having a 
length of 615 meters' — would have crossed the Rue Saint-Lazare, the Rue Saint- 
Nicolas, the Rue des Mathurins, and the Rue Castellane, each of which would have 
had its own station." D Flaneur. Railroad station near <?> the streets 0 ". . . Merely 
by looking at them, we can see how little these plans actually anticipated the future 
of the railroads. Although described as 'monumental,' the facade of this train 
station (which, fortunately, was never built) is of unusually small dimensions; it 
would not even serve to accommodate one of those shops that nowadays extend 
along the corners of certain intersections. It is a sort of Italianate building, three 
stories high, with each story having eight windows; the main entrance is marked by 
a stairway of twenty-four steps leading to a semicircular porch wide enough for 
five or six persons to pass through side by side." Du Camp, Paris, vol. 1, pp. 238— 



The Gare del'Ouest (today?) presents "the double aspect of a factory in operation 
and a ministry." Du Camp, Paris, vol. 1, p. 241. "With your back to the three 
tunnels that pass under the Boulevard des Batignolles, you can take in the whole of 
the train station. You see that it almost has the shape of an immense mandolin: the 
rails would form the strings, and the signal posts, placed at every crossing of the 
tracks, would form the pegs." Du Camp, Paris, vol. 1, p. 250. [F2,2] 

"Charon . . . ruined by the installation of a wire footbridge over the Styx." Grand- 
ville, Un autre monde (Paris, 1844), p. 138. [F2,3] 

The fi rst act of Offenbach's Vie parisienne takes place in a railroad station. "The 
industrial movement seems to run in the blood of this generation — to such an 
extent that, for example, Flachat has built his house on a plot of land where, on 
either side, trains are always whistling by." Sigf ried Giedion, Bauen in Frankreich 
(Leipzig and Berlin <1928>), p. 13. Eugene Flachat (1802-1873), builder of rail- 
roads, designer. [F2,4] 

On the Galerie d'Orleans in the Palais-Royal (1829-1831): "Even Fontaine, one of 
the originators of the Empire style, is converted in later years to the new material. 
In 1835-1836, moreover, he replaced the wooden flooring of the Galerie des 
Batailles in Versailles with an iron assembly. — These galleries, like those in the 
Palais-Royal, were subsequently perfected in Italy. For us, they are a point of 
departure for new architectural problems: train stations, and the like." Sigf'ried 
Giedion, Bauen in Frankreich, p. 21. [F2,5] 



Paris (Paris, 1875), vol. 2, pp. 121-122. 



[Fla,5] 



239. 



[F2,l] 



"The complicated construction (out of iron and copper) of the Corn Exchange in 
1811 was the work of the architect Bellange and the engineer Brunet. It is the first 
time, to our knowledge, that architect and engineer are no longer united in one 
person. . . . Hittorff, the builder of the Gare du Nord, got his insight into iron 
construction from Bellange. — Naturally, it is a matter more of an application of 
iron than a construction in iron. Techniques of wood construction were simply 
transposed to iron." Sigfried Giedion, Bauen in Frankreich, p. 20. [F2,6] 

Apropos of Veugny's covered market built in 1824 near the Madeleine: "The slen- 
derness of the delicate cast-iron columns brings to mind Pompeian wall paintings. 
'The construction, in iron and cast iron, of the new market near the Madeleine is 
one of the most graceful achievements in this genre. One cannot imagine anything 
more elegant or in better taste. . . .' Eck, Traite." Sigfried Giedion, Bauen in 
Frankreich, p. 21. [F2,7] 

"The most important step toward industrialization: mechanical prefabrication of 
specific forms (sections) out of wrought iron or steel. The fields interpenetrate: . . . 
in 1832, railroad workers began not with building components but with rails. Here 
is the point of departure for sectional iron, which is the basis of iron construction. 
[Note to this passage: The new methods of construction penetrate slowly into 
industry. Double-T iron was used in flooring for the first time in Paris in 1845, 
when the masons were out on strike and the price of wood had risen due to in- 
creased construction and larger spans.]" Giedion, Bauen in Frankreich, p. 26. 

[F2,8] 

The first structures made of iron served transitory purposes: covered markets, 
railroad stations, exhibitions. Iron is thus immediately allied with functional 
moments in the life of the economy. What was once functional and transitory, 
however, begins today, at an altered tempo, to seem formal and stable. [F2,9] 

"Les Halles consist of two groups of pavilions joined to each other by covered 
lanes. It is a somewhat timid iron structure that avoids the generous spans of 
Horeau and Flachat and obviously keeps to the model of the greenhouse." 
Giedion, Bauen in Frankreich, p. 28. [F2a,l] 

On the Gare du Nord: "Here they have entirely avoided that abundance of space 
which is found in waiting rooms, entryways, and restaurants around 1880, and 
which led to the problem of the railroad station as exaggerated baroque palace. " 
Giedion, Bauen in Frankreich, p. 31. [F2a,2] 

"Wherever the nineteenth century feels itself to be unobserved, it grows bold." 
Giedion, Bauen in Frankreich, p. 33. hi fact, this sentence holds good in the 
general form that it has here: the anonymous art of the illustrations in family 
magazines and children's books, for example, is proof of the point. [F2a,3] 



Railroad stations <Bahnhofe> used to be known as Eisenbahnhqfe? 



[F2a,4] 



There is talk of renewing art by beginning with forms. But are not forms the true 
mystery of nature, which reserves to itself the right to remunerate — precisely 
through them — the accurate, the objective, the logical solution to a problem posed 
in purely objective terms? When the wheel was invented, enabling continuous 
forward motion over the ground, wouldn't someone there have been able to say, 
with a certain justification, "And now, into the bargain, it's round — it's in the form 
of a wheel?" Are not all great conquests in the field of forms ultimately a matter of 
technical discoveries? Only now are we beginning to guess what forms — and 
they will be determinative for our epoch — lie hidden in machines. "To what 
extent the old forms of the instruments of production influenced their new forms 
from the outset is shown, . . . perhaps more strikingly than in any other way, by 
the attempts, before the invention of the present locomotive, to construct a loco- 
motive that actually had two feet, which, after the fashion of a horse, it raised 
alternately from the ground. It is only after considerable development of the 
science of mechanics, and accumulated practical experience, that the form of a 
machine becomes settled entirely in accordance with mechanical principles, and 
emancipated from the traditional form of the tool that gave rise to it." (In this 
sense, for example, the supports and the load, in architecture, are also "forms") 
Passage is from Marx, Kapital, vol. 1 (Hamburg, 1922), p. 347n." [F2a,5] 

Through the Ecole des Beaux-Arts, architecture is linked with the plastic arts. 
"That was a disaster for architecture. In the Baroque age, this unity had been 
perfect and self-evident. In the course of the nineteenth century, however, it 
became untenable." Sigfried Giedion, Bauen in Frankreich <Leipzig and Berlin, 
1928>, p. 16. This not only provides a very important perspective on the Ba- 
roque; it also indicates that architecture was historically the earliest field to out- 
grow the concept of art, or, better, that it tolerated least well being contemplated 
as "art" — a category which the nineteenth century, to a previously unimagined 
extent but with hardly more justification at bottom, imposed on the creations of 
intellectual productivity. [F3,l] 

The dusty fata morgana of the winter garden, the dreary perspective of the train 
station, with the small altar of happiness at the intersection of the tracks — it all 
molders under spurious constructions, glass before its time, premature iron. For 
in the first third of the previous century, no one as yet understood how to build 
with glass and iron. That problem, however, has long since been solved by 
hangars and silos. Now, it is the same with the human material on the inside of 
the arcades as with the materials of their construction. Pimps are the iron up- 
rights of this street, and its glass breakables are the whores. [F3,2] 

"The new 'architecture' <B*uen> has its origin in the moment of industry's forma- 
tion, around 1830 — the moment of mutation from the craf tsmanly to the industrial 
production process." Giedion, Bauen in Frankreich, p. 2. [F3,3] 



"Railroad tracks," with the peculiar and unmistakable dream world that attaches 
to them, are a very impressive example of just how great the natural symbolic 
power of technological innovation can be. In this regard, it is illuminating to learn 
of the bitter polemic waged against iron rails in the 1830s. In A Treatise in 
Elementary Locomotion, for example, A. Gordon argued that the steam carriage {as 
it was called then) should run on lanes of granite. It was deemed impossible to 
produce enough iron for even the very small number of railway lines being 
planned at that time. [F3,4] 

It must be kept in mind that the magnificent urban views opened up by new 
constructions in iron — Giedion, in bis Bauen in Frankreich (illustrations 61-63), 
gives excellent examples with the Pont Transbordeur in Marseilles — for a long 
time were evident only to workers and engineers. Q Marxism □ For in those days 
who besides the engineer and the proletarian had climbed the steps that alone 
made it possible to recognize what was new and decisive about these structures: 
the feeling of space? [F3,5] 

In 1791, the term ingenieur began to be used in France for those officers skilled in 
the arts of fortification and siege. "At the same time, and in the same country, the 
opposition between 'construction' and 'architecture' began to make itself felt; and 
before long it figured in personal attacks. This antithesis had been entirely un- 
known in the past. . . . But in the innumerable aesthetic treatises which after the 
storms of the Revolution guided French art back into regular channels, . . . the 
constructeurs stood opposed to the decorateurs, and with this the further question 
arose: Did not the ingenieurs, as the allies of the former, necessarily occupy with 
them, socially speaking, a distinct camp?" A. G. Meyer, Eisenbauten (Esslingen, 
1907), p. 3. [F3,6] 

"The technique of stone architecture is stereotomy; that of wood is tectonics. What 
does iron construction have in common with the one or the other?" Alfred Gott- 
hold Meyer, Eisenbauten (Esslingen, 1907), p. 5. "In stone we feel the natural 
spirit of the mass. Iron is, for us, only artificially compressed durability and 
tenacity" (p. 9). "Iron has a tensile strength forty times greater than that of stone 
and ten times greater than that of wood, although its net weight is only four times 
that of stone and only eight times that of wood. In comparison with a stone mass of 
the same dimensions, therefore, an iron hody possesses, with only four times the 
weight, a load limit forty times higher" (p. 11). [F3,7] 

"This material, in its first hundred years, has already undergone essential trans- 
formations — cast iron, wrought iron, ingot iron — so that today the engineer has at 
his disposal a huilding material completely different from that of some fifty years 
ago. ... In the perspective of historical reflection, these are 'ferments' of a disqui- 
eting instability. No other huilding material offers anything remotely similar. We 
stand here at the heginning of a development that is sure to proceed at a furious 
pace. . . . The . . . conditions of the material . . . are volatilized in 'limitless 



possibilities.'" A. G. Meyer, Eisenbauten, p. 11. Iron as revolutionary building 
material! [F3a,l] 



Meanwhile, how it looked in the vulgar consciousness is indicated by the crass 
yet typical utterance of a contemporary journalist, according to whom posterity 
will one day have to confess, "In the nineteenth century, ancient Greek architec- 
ture once again blossomed in its classical purity." Europa, 2 (Stuttgart and 
Leipzig, 1837), p. 207. [F3a,2] 

Railroad stations as "abodes of art." "If Wiertz had had at his disposal . . . the 
public monuments of modern civilization — railway stations, legislative chambers, 
university lecture halls, marketplaces, town halls — . . . who can say what bright 
and dramatic new worlds he would have traced upon his canvas!" A. J. Wiertz, 
Oeuvres litteraires (Paris, 1870), pp. 525-526. [F3a,3] 

The technical absolutism that is fundamental to iron construction — and funda- 
mental merely on account of the material itself — becomes apparent to anyone 
who recognizes the extent to which it contrasts with traditional conceptions of 
the value and utility of building materials. "Iron inspired a certain distrust just 
because it was not immmediately furnished by nature, but instead had to be 
artificially prepared as a building material. This distrust is only a specific applica- 
tion of that general sentiment of the Renaissance to which Leon Battista Alberti 
(De re aedificatoria [Paris, 1512], fol. xliv) gives expression at one point with the 
words: 'Nam est quidem cujusquis corporis pars indissolubilior, quae a natura 
concreta et counita est, quam quae hominum manu et arte conjuncta atque, 
compacta est' <For there is, in each thing, a part that is the work and the assem- 
blage of nature, and that is more indissoluble than that which is produced and 
assembled by the hand of man with his art>." A. G. Meyer, Eisenbauten (Esslin- 
gen, 1907), p. 14. [F3a,4] 

It is worth considering — and it appears that the answer to this question would be 
in the negative — whether, at an earlier period, technical necessities in architecture 
(but also in the other arts) determined the forms, the style, as thoroughly as they 
do today, when such technological derivation seems actually to become the 
signature of everything now produced. With iron as a material, this is already 
clearly the case, and perhaps for the first time. Indeed, the "basic forms in which 
iron appears as a building material are . . . already themselves, as distinct synthe- 
ses, partly new. And their distinctiveness, in large measure, is the product and 
expression of the natural properties of the building material, since such properties 
have been technically and scientifically developed and exploited precisely for 
these forms. The systematic industrial process which converts raw material into 
immediately available building material begins, with iron, at a much earlier stage 
than with previously existing building materials. Between matter and material, in 
this case, there is a relationship quite different from that between stone and 
ashlar, clay and tile, timber and beam: with iron, building material and structural 



form are, as it were, more homogeneous." A. G. Meyer, Eisenbauten (Esslingen, 
1907), p. 23. [F3a,5] 



1840-1844: "The construction of fortifications, inspired by Thiers. . . . Thiers, 
who thought that railroads would never work, had gates constructed in Paris at 
the very moment when railroad stations were needed." Dubech and d'Espezel, 
Histoire de Paris (Paris, 1926), p. 386. [F3a,6] 

"From the fifteenth century onward, this nearly colorless glass, in the form of 
window panes, rules over the house as well. The whole development of interior 
space obeys the command: 'More light!' 5 — In seventeenth-century Holland, this 
development leads to window openings that, even in houses of the middle class, 
ordinarily take up almost half the wall. . . . / The abundance of light occasioned 
by this practice must have . . . soon become disagreeable. Within the room, 
curtains offered a relief that was quickly to become, through the overzealous art 
of the upholsterer, a disaster. . . . / The development of space by means of glass 
and iron had come to a standstill. / Suddenly, however, it gained new strength 
from a perfectly inconspicuous source. / Once again, this source was a 'house,' 
one designed to 'shelter the needy,' but it was a house neither for mortals nor for 
divinities, neither for hearth fires nor for inanimate goods; it was, rather, a house 
for plants. / The origin of all present-day architecture in iron and glass is the 
greenhouse." A. G. Meyer, Eisenbauten, p. 55. D Light in the Arcades D Mirrors □ 
The arcade is the hallmark of the world Proust depicts. Curious that, like this 
world, it should be bound in its origin to the existence of plants. [F4,l] 

On the Crystal Palace of 1851: "Of all the great things about this work, the great- 
est, in every sense of the word, is the vaulted central hall. . . . Now, here too, at 
first, it was not a space-articulating architect who did the talking but a — gar- 
dener. . . . This is literally true: the main reason for the elevation of the central 
hall was the presence, in this section of Hyde Park, of magnificent elm trees, which 
neither the Londoners nor Paxton himself wished to see felled. Incorporating them 
into his giant glass house, as he had done earlier with the exotic plants at 
Chatsworth, Paxton almost unconsciously — but nonetheless fundamentally — en- 
hanced the architectural value of his construction." A. G. Meyer, Eisenbauten 
(Esslingen, 1907), p. 62. [F4,2] 

In opposition to the engineers and builders, <Charles-Francois> Viel, as architect, 
publishes his extremely violent, comprehensive polemic against static calculation, 
under the title De I Impuissance des mathematiques pour assurer la solidite des 
bdtiments <On the Uselessness of Mathematics for Assuring the Stability of Build- 
ings) (Paris, 1805). [F4,3] 

The following holds good for the arcades, particularly as iron structures: "Their 
most essential component ... is the roof. Even the etymology of the word 'hall"' 
points to this. It is a covered, not an enclosed space; the side walls are, so to 



Interior of the Crystal Palace, London, from a photograph by William Henry Fox Talbot. See 
F4.2. 



speak, 'concealed.'" This last point pertains in a special sense to the arcades, 
whose walls have only secondarily the function of partitioning the hall; primarily, 
they serve as walls or facades for the commercial spaces within them. The pas- 
sage is from A. G. Meyer, Eisenbauten, p. 69. [F4,4] 

The arcade as iron construction stands on the verge of horizontal extension. 
That is a decisive condition for its "old-fashioned" appearance. It displays, in this 
regard, a hybrid character, analogous in certain respects to that of the Baroque 
church — "the vaulted 'hall* that comprehends the chapels only as an extension of 
its own proper space, which is wider than ever before. Nevertheless, an attraction 
'from on high' is also at work in this Baroque hall — an upward-tending ecstasy, 
such as jubilates from the frescoes on the ceiling. So long as ecclesiastical spaces 
aim to be more than spaces for gathering, so long as they strive to safeguard the 
idea of the eternal, they will be satisfied with nothing less than an overarching 
unity, in which the vertical tendency outweighs the horizontal." A. G. Meyer, 
Eisenbauten, p. 74. On the other hand, it may be said that something sacral, a 
vestige of the nave, still attaches to this row of commodities that is the arcade. 
From a functional point of view, the arcade already occupies the field of horizon- 
tal amplitude; architecturally, however, it still stands within the conceptual field of 
the old "hall." ' [F4,5] 

The Galerie des Machines, built in 1889, 7 was torn down in 1910 "out of artistic 
sadism." [F4,6] 

Historical extension of the horizontal: "From the palaces of the Italian High Ren- 
aissance, the chateaux of the French kings take the 'gallery,' wliich — as in the case 
of the 'Gallery of Apollo' at the Louvre and the 'Gallery of Mirrors' at Versailles — 
becomes the emblem of majesty itself. . . . / Its new triumphal advance in the nine- 
teenth century begins under the sign of the purely utilitarian structure, with those 
halls known as warehouses and markets, workshops and factories; the problem of 
railroad stations and, above all, of exhibitions leads it back to art. And every- 
where the demand for continuous horizontal extension is so great that the stone 
arch and the wooden ceiling can have only very limited applications. ... In Gothic 
structures, the walls turn into the ceiling, whereas in iron halls of the type . . . 
represented by the Gallery of Machines in Paris, the ceiling slides over the walls 
without interruption." A. G. Meyer, Eisenbauten, pp. 74—75. [F4a,l] 

Never before was the criterion of the "minimal" so important. And that includes 
the minimal element of quantity: the "little," the "few." These are dimensions 
that were well established in technological and architectural constructions long 
before literature made bold to adapt them. Fundamentally, it is a question of 
the earliest manifestation of the principle of montage. On building the Eiffel 
Tower: "Thus, the plastic shaping power abdicates here in favor of a colossal 
span of spiritual energy, which channels the inorganic material energy into the 
smallest, most efficient forms and conjoins these forms in the most effective 



maimer. . . . Each of the twelve thousand metal fittings, each of the two and a half 
million rivets, is machined to the millimeter. . . . On this work site, one hears no 
chisel-blow liberating form from stone; here thought reigns over muscle power, 
which it transmits via cranes and secure scaffolding." A. G. Meyer, Eisenbauten, 
p. 93. 0 Precursors D [F4a,2] 

"Haussmann was incapable of having what could be called a policy on railroad 
stations. . . . Despite a directive from the emperor, who justly baptized les gares 
'the new gateways of Paris,' the continued development of the railroads surprised 
everyone, surpassing all expectations. . . . The habit of a certain empiricism was 
not easily overcome." Dubech and d'Espezel, Histoire de Paris (Paris, 1926), 
p. 419. [F4a,3] 

Eiffel Tower. "Greeted at first by a storm of protest, it has remained quite ugly, 
though it proved useful for research on wireless telegraphy. ... It has been said 
that this world exhibition marked the triumph of iron construction. It would he 
truer to say that it marked its bankruptcy." Dubech and d'Espezel, Histoire de 
Paris, pp. 461-462. [F4a,4] 

"Around 1878, it was thought that salvation lay in iron construction. Its 'yearning 
for verticality' (as Salomon Reinach put it), the predominance of empty spaces 
over filled spaces, and the lightness of its visible frame raised hopes that a style was 
emerging in which the essence of the Gothic genius would be revived and rejuve- 
nated by a new spirit and new materials. But when engineers erected the Galerie 
des Machines and the Eiffel Tower in 1889, people despaired of the art of iron. 
Perhaps too soon." Dubech and d'Espezel, Histoire de Paris, p. 464. [F4a,5] 

Beranger: "His sole reproach to the regime of Louis Philippe was that it put the 
republic to grow in a hothouse." Franz Diederich, "Victor Hugo," Die neue Zeit, 
20, no. 1 (Stuttgart, 1901), p. 648. [F4a,6] 

"The path that leads from the Empire form of the first locomotive to the fin- 
ished objective and functional form of today marks an evolution." Joseph Aug. 
Lux, "Maschinenasthetik," Die neue Zeit, 27, no. 2 (Stuttgart, 1909), p. 439. 

[F4a,7] 

''Those endowed with an especially fine artistic conscience have hurled down, 
from the altar of art, curse after curse on the building engineers. It suffices to 
mention Ruskin." A. G. Meyer, Eisenbauten (Esslingen, 1907), p. 3. [F5,l] 

Concerning the artistic idea of Empire. On Daumier: "He displayed the greatest 
enthusiasm for muscular excitations. Tirelessly his pencil exalts the tension and 
movement of muscles. . . . But the public of which he dreamed was proportioned 
differently from this ignoble . . . society of shopkeepers. He yearned for a social 
milieu that would have provided, like that of ancient Greece, a hase from which 



people could raise themselves, as from a pedestal, in vigorous beauty. ... A gro- 
tesque distortion must . . . result when the bourgeoisie is viewed from the angle of 
such ideals. Daumier's caricatures were thus the almost involuntary consequence 
of a lofty ambition that failed in its aim of attunement with the middle-class pub- 
lic. ... In 1835, an attempt on the life of the king" presented an . . . opportunity to 
curtail . . . the boldness of the press, which had been publicly blamed for the deed. 
Political caricature became impossible. . . . Hence, the drawings of lawyers done 
in this period are ... by far the most passionate and animated. The courtroom is 
the only place where pitched battles can still be waged in all their fury, and lawyers 
are the only people in whom an emphatically muscular rhetoric and a profession- 
ally dramatic pose have made for an elaborate physiognomy of the body." Fritz 
Th. Schulte, "Honore Daumier," Die neue Zeit, 32, no. 1 (Stuttgart <1913>), 
pp. 833-835. [F5,2] 

The miscarriage of Baltard's design for Les Halles, built in 1853, is due to the 
same unfortunate combination of masonry and ironwork as in the original proj- 
ect for the London exhibition hall of 1851, the work of the Frenchman Horeau. 
Parisians referred to Baltard's structure, which was subsequently torn down, as le 
fort de la Halle. [F5,3] 

On the Crystal Palace, with the elms in its midst: "Under these glass arches, 
thanks to awnings, ventilators, and gushing fountains, visitors revel in a delicious 
coolness. In the words of one observer: 'You might think you were under the 
billows of some fabulous river, in the crystal palace of a fairy or naiad.'" A. Demy, 
Essai historique <sur les expositions universelles de Paris (Paris, 1907)>, p. 40. 

[F5,4] 

"After the closing of the London Exhibition in 1851, people in England won- 
dered what was to become of the Crystal Palace. Although a clause inserted in 
the deed of concession for the grounds required . . . the demolition ... of the 
building, public opinion was unanimous in asking for the abrogation of this 
clause. . . . The newspapers were full of proposals of all kinds, many of which 
were distinctly eccentric. A doctor wanted to turn the place into a hospital; 
another suggested a bathing establishment. . . . One person had the idea of mak- 
ing it a gigantic library. An Englishman with a violent passion for flowers insisted 
on seeing the whole palace become a garden." The Crystal Palace was acquired 
by Francis Fuller and transferred to Sydenham. A. S. de Doncourt, Les Expositions 
universelles (Lille and Paris <1889>), p. 77. Compare F6a,l. The Bourse could 
represent anything; the Crystal Palace could be used for anything. [F5a,l] 

"Furniture making in tubular iron . . . rivals furniture making in wood, and even 
surpasses it. Furniture of such iron, with baked-on color, . . . enameled with flow- 
ers or with patterns imitating those of inlaid wood, is elegant and nicely turned, 



like the tops of Boucher's gates." Edouard Foucaud, Paris inventeur: Physiologie 
de Vindustriefranqaise (Paris, 1844), pp. 92-93. [F5a,2] 



The square opposite the Gare du Nord was known in 1860 as the Place de 
Roubaix. [F5a,3] 

In engravings of the period, horses are prancing across railroad station espla- 
nades, and stagecoaches roll by in clouds of dust. [F5a,4] 

Caption for a woodcut representing a catafalque in the Gare du Nord: "Last 
respects paid to Meyerbeer in Paris at the gare de chemin defer du Nord." 

[F5a,5] 

Factories with galleries inside and winding iron staircases. Early prospectuses and 
illustrations show production rooms and display rooms, which are often under the 
same roof, fondly represented in cross-section like doll houses. Thus a prospectus 
of 1865 for the footwear company Pinet. Not infrequently one sees ateliers, like 
those of photographers, with sliding shades in front of the skylight. Cabinet des 
Estampes. [F5a,6] 

The Eiffel Tower: "It is characteristic of this most famous construction of the 
epoch that, for all its gigantic stature, ... it nevertheless feels like a knickknack, 
which . . . speaks for the fact that the second-rate artistic sensibility of the era 
could think, in general, only within the framework of genre and the technique of 
filigree." Egon Friedell, Kulturgeschichte der Neuzeit, vol. 3 (Munich, 1931), 
p. 363. [F5a,7] 

"Michel Chevalier sets down his dreams of the new temple in a poem: 
I would have you see my temple, the Lord God said. 



The eolumns of the temple 

Were strong beams; 
Of hollow cast-iron columns 
Was the organ of this new temple. 



The framework was of iron, of molded steel, 

Of copper and of bronze. 
The architect had placed it upon the columns 
Like a stringed instrument upon a woodwind. 



From the temple came, moreover, at each moment of the day, 
The sounds of a new harmony. 
The slender spire rose up like a lightning rod; 
It reached to the clouds, 



La Casse-tete-omanie, ou La Fureur du jour (Picture Puzzle Mania, or They're All the Rage These 
Days). See F6,2. 



To seek there electrie force; 
Storms have charged it with vitality and tension. 



At the top of the minarets 
The telegraph was waving its arms, 
Bringing from all parts 
Good news to the people." 

Henry-Rene D'Allemagne, Les Saint-Simoniens, 1827-1837 (Paris, 1930), p. 308. 

[F6.1] 

Hie "Chinese puzzle," which comes into fashion during the Empire, reveals the 
century's awakening sense for construction. The problems that appear, in the 
puzzles of die period, as hatched portions of a landscape, a building, or a figure 
are a first presentiment of the cubist principle in the plastic arts. (To verify: 
whether, in an allegorical representation in the Cabinet des Estampes, the brain- 
teaser undoes the kaleidoscope or vice versa.) [F6,2] 

"Paris a vol d'oiseau" <A Bird's-Eye View of Paris) — Notre-Dame de Pans, vol. 1, 
book 3 — concludes its overview of the architectural histoiy of the city with an 
ironic characterization of the present day, which culminates in a description of the 
architectural insignificance of the Stock Exchange. The importance of the chap- 
ter is underlined by a note added to the definitive edition of 1832, which says: 
"The author . . . enlarges, in one of these chapters, upon the current decadence of 
architecture and the now (in his view) almost inevitable demise of this king of the 



arts — a view which is, unhappily, deeply rooted in him and deeply pondered." 
Victor Hugo, Oeuvres completes, novels, vol. 3 (Paris, 1880), p. 5." [F6,3] 



Before the decision to build the Palais de 1'Industrie 10 was made, a plan had 
existed to roof over a section of the Champs-Elysees — along with its trees — in the ^ 
manner of the Crystal Palace. [F6,4] | 

Victor Hugo, in JSotre-Dame de Paris, on the Bourse: "If it he the rule that the g 
architecture of a building should he adapted to its function, ... we can hardly 
wonder enough at a monument which might equally well be a king's palace, a house 
of commons, a town hall, a college, a riding school, an academy, a warehouse, a 
law court, a museum, a barracks, a sepulcher, a temple, or a theater. For the 
present, it is a stock exchange. ... It is a stock exchange in France just as it would 
have been a temple in Greece. . . . We have the colonnade encircling the monu- 
ment, beneath which, on days of high religious solemnity, the theory of stockbro- 
kers and jobbers can be majestically expounded. These, for sure, are very stately 
monuments. If we add to them many fine streets, as amusing and diverse as the 
Rue de Rivoli, then I do not despair but that one day a balloon's-eye view of Paris 
will offer us that wealth of lines, . . . that diversity of aspect, that somehow . . . 
unexpected beauty, which characterizes a checkerboard." Victor Hugo, Oeuvres 
completes, novels, vol. 3 (Paris, 1880), pp. 206-207 (JSotre-Dame de Paris). 11 

[F6a,l] 




The Paris Stock Exchange, mid-nineteenth century. Courtesy of the Paris Stock Exchange. 
SeeF6a,l. 



The Palais de l'lndustrie at the world exhibition of 1855. See F6a,2. 



Palais de l'lndustrie: "One is struck by the elegance and lightness of the iron 
framework; yet the engineer, . . . Monsieur Barrault, has shown more skill than 
taste. As for the domed glass roof, ... it is awkwardly placed, and the idea evoked 
. . . is . . . that of a large cloche: industry in a hothouse. . . . On each side of the 
entrance have been placed two superb locomotives with their tenders." This last 
arrangement presumably occasioned by the distribution of prizes which closed the 
exhibition on November 15, 1855. Louis Enault, "Le Palais de l'lndustrie," in 
Paris et les Parisiens auXIX" siecle (Paris, 1856), pp. 313, 315. [F6a,2] 

From Charles-Franyois Viel, De Vlmpuissance des mathematiques pour assurer la 
solidite des batiments (Paris, 1805): Viel distinguishes ordonnance <planning, lay- 
out) from construction and faults the younger architects above all for insufficient 
knowledge of the former. Ultimately responsible is "the new direction that public 
instruction in this art has taken, in the wake of our political tempests" (p. 9). "As 
for the geometers who practice architecture, their buildings — as regards invention 
and construction — prove the nullity of mathematics where ordonnance and struc- 
tural stability are concerned" (p. 10). "The mathematicians . . . claim to have . . . 
reconciled boldness with stability. It is only under the aegis of algebra that these 



two words can meet" (p. 25; it remains to be determined whether this last sentence 
is meant ironically, or whether it distinguishes between algebra and mathematics). 
The author criticizes the Pont du Louvre and the Pont de la Cite (both bridges 
from 1803) in accordance with the principles of Leon Battista Alberti. [F6a,3] 

According to Viel, the first bridges to be built on a constructive basis would have 
been undertaken around 1730. [F7,l] 

In 1855, the Hotel du Louvre was constructed at a rapid tempo, so as to be in place 
for the opening of the world exhibition. "For the first time, the entrepreneurs used 
electric light on the site, in order to double the day's labor; some unexpected 
delays occurred; the city was just coming out of the famous carpenters' strike, 
which put an end to wood-frame structures in Paris. Consequently, the Hotel du 
Louvre possesses the rare distinction of having wedded, in its design, the wood 
paneling of old houses to the iron flooring of modern buildings." V"' G. d'Avenel, 
"Le Mecanisme de la vie moderne," part 1, "Les Grands Magasins," Revue des 
deux mondes (July 15, 1894), p. 340. [F7,2] 

"In the beginning, railroad cars look like stagecoaches, autobuses like omnibuses, 
electric lights like gas chandeliers, and the last like petroleum lamps." Leon 
Pierre-Quint, "Signification du cinema," L'Art cinematographique, 2 (Paris, 
1927), p. 7. [F7.3] 

Apropos of the Empire style of Schinkel: "The building that brings out the lo- 
cation, the substructure that embodies the true seat of invention, . . . these 
things resemble — a vehicle. They convey architectural ideals, which only in this 
sort of way can still be 'practiced.'" Carl Linfert, "Vom Ursprung grosser 
Baugedanken," Frankfurter Zeitung, January 9, 1936. [F7,4] 

On the world exhibition of 1889: "We can say of this festivity that it has been 
celebrated, ahove all, to the glory of iron. . . . Having undertaken to give readers 
of Le Correspondant a rough idea of industry in connection with the Exposition du 
Champ de Mars, we have chosen for our theme 'Metal Structures and Railroads.'" 
Albert de Lapparent, Le Siecle dufer (Paris, 1890), pp. vii-viii. [F7,5] 

On the Crystal Palace: "The arcliitect, Paxton, and the contractors, Messrs. Fox 
and Henderson, had systematically resolved not to use parts with large dimen- 
sions. The heaviest were hollow cast-iron girders, eight meters long, none of which 
weighed more than a ton. . . . Their chief merit was that they were economical. . . . 
Moreover, the execution of the plan was remarkahly rapid, since all the parts were 
of a sort that the factories could undertake to deliver quickly. " Albert de Lappar- 
ent, Le Siecle dufer (Paris, 1890), ]>. 59. [F7,6] 



Lapparent divides iron structures into two classes: iron structures with stone 
facings and true iron structures. He places the following example among the fi rst 



sort. "Labrouste . . . , in 1868, . . . gave to the puhlic the reading room of the 
Bibliotheque Nationale. ... It is difficult to imagine anything more satisfying or 
more harmonious than this great chamher of 1,156 square meters, with its nine 
fretted cupolas, incorporating arches of iron lattice and resting on sixteen light 
cast-iron columns, twelve of which are set against the walls, while four, completely 
free-standing, rise from the floor on pedestals of the same metal." Alhert de Lap- 
parent, Le Siecle dufer (Paris, 1890), pp. 56-57. [F7a,l] 

The engineer Alexis Barrault, who with Viel built the Palace of Industry in 1855, 
was a brother of Emile Barrault. [F7a,2] 

In 1779, the first cast-iron bridge (that of Coalbrookdale). In 1788, its builder 12 
was awarded the Gold Medal of the English Society of Arts. "Since it was in 1790, 
furthermore, that the architect Louis completed the wrought-iron framework for 
the Theatre Frangais in Paris, we may say that the centenary of metal construction 
coincides almost exactly with that of the French Revolution." A. de Lapparent, Le 



On the suhject of the Chinese puzzle, a lithograph: The Triumph of the Kaleido- 
scope, or the Demise »f the Chinese Game. A reclining Chinese man with a hrain- 
teaser spread out on the ground before him. On his shoulder, a female figure has 
planted her foot. In one hand, she carries a kaleidoscope; in the other, a paper or 
a scroll with kaleidoscope patterns. Cahinet des Estampes (dated 1818). [F7a,5] 

"The head turns and the heart tightens when, for the first time, we visit those fairy 
halls where polished iron and dazzling copper seem to move and think by them- 
selves, while pale and feeble man is only the humble servant of those steel giants." 
J. Michelet, Le Peuple (Paris, 1846), p. 82. The author in no way fears that me- 
chanical production will gain the upper hand over human heings. The individual- 
ism of the consumer seems to him to speak against this: each "man now . . . wants 
to be himself. Consequently, he will often care less for products fahricated by 
classes, without any individuality that speaks to his own" (ihid. , p. 78). 13 [F7a,6] 

"Viollet-le-Duc (1814-1879) shows that the architects of the Middle Ages were also 
engineers and resourceful inventors." Amedee Ozenfant, "La Peinture murale," 
Encyclopedia francaise, vol. 16, Arts et litteratu res dans la societe contempo- 
raine, part 1 , p. 70, column 3. [F8,l] 

Protest against the Eiffel Tower: "We come, as writers, painters, sculptors, archi- 
tects, ... in the name of French art and French history, hoth of which are threat- 
ened, ... to protest against the construction, in the very heart of our capital, of 
the useless and monstrous Eiffel Tower. ... Its harharous mass overwhelms 
Notre-Dame, the Sainte-Chapelle, the Tower of Saint- Jacques. All our monuments 



Siecle dufer (Paris, 1890), pp. 11-12. 



[F7a,3] 



Paris, in 1822: a "woodwork strike. 



[F7a,4] 




Le Triomphe du kaleidoscope, ou Le Tombeau du jeu chinois (The 
Triumph of die Kaleidoscope, or The Demise of the Chinese 
Game), 1818. Courtesy of the Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris. 
See F7a,5. 



are debased , our architecture diminished." Cited in Louis Cheronnet, "Les Trois 
Grand-meres de Imposition," Vendredi, April 30, 1937. [F8,2] 

Supposedly there were trees within Musard's "Harmony Hall," on the Boulevard 
Montmartre. [F8,3] 

"It was in 1783, in the construction of the Theatre Francais, that iron was em- 
ployed for the first time on a large scale, by the architect Louis. Never perhaps, 
has a work so audacious been attempted. When, in 1900, the theater was rehuiltin 
the aftermath of a fi re, it was with a weight of iron one hundred times greater than 
that which the architect Louis had used for the same trusswork. Construction in 
iron has provided a succession of buildings, of which the great reading room of the 
Bihliotheque Nationale hy Lahrouste was the first, and one of the most success- 
ful. . . . But iron requires costly maintenance. . . . The world exhibition of 1889 



marked the triumph of exposed ironwork . . . ; at the exhibition of 1900, nearly all 
the iron frames were covered with plasterwork." L' Encyclopedic francaise, vol. 
16, 16-68, pp. 6-7 (Auguste Perret, "Les Besoins collectifs et l'architecture"). 



The "triumph of exposed ironwork" in the age of the genre: "It may be . . . the . . . 
enthusiasm for machine technology and the faith in the superior durability of its 
materials that explains why the attribute 'iron' is used . . . whenever . . . power 
and necessity are supposed to be manifest. Iron are the laws of nature, and iron is 
the 'stride of the worker battalion 1 ; the . . . union of the German empire is suppos- 
edly made of iron, and so is . . . the chancellor himself." Dolf Sternberger, Pano- 



The iron balcony. "In its most rigorous form, the house has a uniform facade. . . . 
Articulation results only from doors and windows. In France, the window is, 
without exception, even in the poorest house, a porte-fenetre, a 'French window' 
opening to the floor. . . . This makes a railing necessary; in the poorer houses it is 
a plain iron bar, hut in the wealthier houses it is of wrought iron. ... At a certain 
stage, the railing becomes an ornament. ... It further contributes to the articula- 
tion of the facade by . . . accenting the lower line of the window. And it fulfills both 
functions without hreaking the plane of the facade. For the great architectural 
mass of the modern house, with its insistent lateral extension, this articulation 
could not possibly suffice. The architects' building-sense demanded that the ever 
stronger horizontal tendency of the house ... be given expression. . . . And they 
discovered the means for this in the traditional iron grille. Across the entire length 
of the building front, on one or two stories, they set a balcony provided with an 
iron grating of this type, which, being black, stands out very distinctly and makes 
a vigorous impression. These balconies, ... up to the most recent period of build- 
ing, were kept very narrow; and if through them the severity of the surface is 
overcome, what can be called the relief of the facade remains nonetheless quite 
flat, overcoming the effect of the wall as little as does the sculpted ornamentation, 
likewise kept flat. In the case of adjoining houses , these balcony railings fuse with 
one another and consolidate the impression of a walled street; and this effect is 
heightened by the fact that, wherever the upper stories are used for commercial 
purposes, the proprietors put up . . . not signboards but matched gilded letters in 
roman style, which, when well spaced across the ironwork, appeal - purely decora- 



[F8,4] 



rama (Hamburg, 1938), p. 31. 



[F8,5] 



live." Fritz Stahl, Paris (Berlin <1929>), pp. 18-19. 



[F8a] 