[Exhibitions, Advertising, Grandville] 

Yes, when all the world from Paris to China 

Pays heed to your doctrine, O divine Saint-Simon, 

The glorious Golden Age will be reborn. 

Rivers will flow with chocolate and tea, 

Sheep roasted whole will frisk on the plain, 

And sauteed pike will swim in the Seine. 

Fricasseed spinach will grow on the ground, 

Garnished with crushed fried croutons; 

The trees will bring forth apple compotes, 

And fanners will harvest boots and coats. 

It will snow wine, it will rain chickens, 

And ducks cooked with turnips will fall from the sky. 

— Ferdinand Langle and Emile Vanderburch, Louis-Bronze et k Saint- 
Simonien: Parodie de Louis XI (Theatre du Palais-Royal, February 27, 
1832), cited in Theodore Muret, L'Hhtoire par k theitre, 1789-1851 
(Paris, 1865), vol. 3, p. 191 

Music such as one gets to hear on the pianofortes of Saturn's 
ring. 

— Hector Berlioz, A travers chants, authorized German edition pre- 
pared by Richard Pobl (Leipzig, 1864), p. 104 ("Beethoven im Ring 
des Satxim") 



From a European perspective, things looked this way : In all areas of production, 
from the Middle Ages until the beginning of the nineteenth century, the develop- 
ment of technology proceeded at a much slower rate than the development of art. 
Art could take its time in variously assimilating the technological modes of 
operation. But the transformation of things that set in around 1800 dictated the 
tempo to art, and the more breathtaking this tempo became, the more readily the 
dominion of fashion overspread all fields. Finally, we arrive at the present state of 
things: the possibility now arises that art will no longer lind time to adapt some- 
how to technological processes. The advertisement is the ruse by which the 
dream forces itself on industry. [Gl,l] 



Within the frames of the pictures that hung on dining room walls, the advent of 
whiskey advertisements, of Van Houten cocoa, of Amieux canned food is her- 



aided. Naturally, one can say that the bourgeois comfort of the dining room has 
survived longest in small cafes and other such places; but perhaps one can also 
say that the space of the cafe, within which every square meter and every hour 
are paid for more punctually than in apartment houses, evolved out of the latter. 
The apartment from which a cafe was made is a picture puzzle < Vexierbild> with 
the caption: Where is the capital hiding? [Gl ,2] 

Grandville's works are the sibylline books oipublicite. Everything that, with him, 
has its preliminary form as joke, or satire, attains its true unfolding as adver- 
tisement. [Gl,3] 

Handbill of a Parisian textiles dealer from the 1830s: "Ladies and Gentlemen: / I 
ask you to cast an indulgent eye on the following observations; my desire to con- 
tribute to your eternal salvation impels me to address you. Allow me to direct your 
attention to the study of the Holy Scriptures, as well as to the extremely moderate 
prices which I have been the first to introduce into the field of hosiery, cotton 
goods, and related products. No. 13, Rue Pave-Saint-Sauveur." Eduard Kroloff, 
Schilderungen aus Paris (Hamburg, 1839), vol. 2, pp. 50-51. [Gl,4] 

Superposition and advertising: "In the Palais-Royal, not long ago, between the 
columns on the upper story, I happened to see a life-sized oil painting repre- 
senting, in very lively colors, a French generalin full-dress uniform. I take out my 
spectacles to examine more closely the historical subject of the picture, and my 
general is sitting in an armchair holding out a bare foot: the podiatrist, kneeling 
before him, excises the corns." J. F. Reichardt, Vertraute Briefe aus Paris (Ham- 
burg, 1805), vol. 1, p. 178. [Gl,5] 

In 1861, the first lithographic poster suddenly appeared on walls here and there 
around London. It showed the back of a woman in white who was thickly 
wrapped in a shawl and who, in all haste, had just reached the top of a flight of 
stairs, where, her head half turned and a finger upon her lips, she is ever so 
slightly opening a heavy door, through which one glimpses the starry sky. In this 
way Wilkie Collins advertised his latest book, one of the greatest detective novels 
ever written: The Woman in White. See Talmeyr, La Cite' du sang (Paris, 1901), 
pp. 263-264. [Gl,6] 

It is significant that Jugendstil failed in interior design, and soon afterward in 
architecture too, whereas in the street, with the poster, it often found very suc- 
cessful solutions. This is fully confirmed in Behne's discerning critique: "By no 
means was Jugendstil ridiculous in its original intentions. It was looking for 
renewal because it clearly recognized the peculiar contradictions arising between 
imitation Renaissance art and new methods of production determined by the 
machine. But it gradually became ridiculous because it believed that it could 
resolve the enormous objective tensions formally, on paper, in the studio." D In- 
terior D Adolf Behne, Neues Wthnen — Neues Bauen (Leipzig, 1927), p. 15. Of 



course, in the end, the law according to which an action brings about an opposite 
reaction holds true for Jugendstil. The genuine liberation from an epoch, that is, 
has the structure of awakening in this respect as well: it is entirely ruled by 
cunning. Only with cunning, not without it, can we work free of the realm of 
dream. But there is also a false liberation; its sign is violence. From the beginning, 
it condemnedjugendstil to failure. D Dream Structure D [Gl , 7] 

Innermost, decisive significance of the advertisement: "Good posters exist . . . 
only in the domain of trifles, of industry, or of revolution." Maurice Talmeyr, La 
Cite du sang (Paris, 1901), p. 277. The same thought with which the bourgeois 
here detects the tendency of advertising in its early period: "In short, the moral of 
the poster has nothing to do with its art, and its art nothing to do with the moral, 
and this defines the character of the poster" (ibid., p. 275). [Gl,8] 

Just as certain modes of presentation — genre scenes and the like — begin, in the 
course of the nineteenth century, to "cross over" into advertising, so also into the 
realm of the obscene. The Nazarene style and the Makart style have their black 
and their colored lithographic cousins in the field of obscene graphics. I saw a 
plate that, at first glance, could have passed as something like Siegfried's bath in 
dragon blood: green sylvan solitude, crimson mantle of the hero, naked flesh, a 
sheet of water — it was the most complicated embrace of three human bodies, and 
it looked like the frontispiece of an inexpensive book for young people. This is 
the language of color characteristic of the posters that flourished in the arcades. 
When we hear that portraits of famous cancan dancers like Rigolette and 
Frichette would have hung there, we have to imagine them colored like this. 
Falser colors are possible in the arcades; that combs are red and green surprises 
no one. Snow White's stepmother had such things, and when the comb did not 
do its work, the beautiful apple was there to help out — half red, half poison- 
green, like cheap combs. Everywhere gloves play a starring role, colored ones, 
but above all the long black variety on which so many, following Y/ette Guilbert, 
have placed their hopes for happiness, and which will bring some, let us hope, to 
Margo Lion. And laid out on a side table in a tavern, stockings make for an 
ethereal meat counter. [Gla.l] 

The writings of the Surrealists treat words like trade names, and their texts are, at 
bottom, a form of prospectus for enterprises not yet off the ground. Nesting 
today in trade names are figments such as those earlier thought to be hidden in 
the cache of "poetic" vocables. [Gla,2] 

In 1867, a wallpaper dealer put up his posters on the columns of bridges. [Gla,3] 

Manyyears ago, on the streetcar, I saw a posterthat, if things had their due in this 
world, would have found its admirers, historians, exegetes, and copyists just as 
surely as any great poem or painting. And, in fact, it was both at the same time. 



As is sometimes the case with very deep, unexpected impressions, however, the 
shock was too violent: the impression, if I may say so, struck with such force that 
it broke through the bottom of my consciousness and for years lay irrecoverable 
somewhere in the darkness. I knew only that it had to do with "Bullrich Salt" and 
that the original warehouse for this seasoning was a small cellar on Flottwell 
Street, where for years I had circumvented the temptation to get out at this point 
and inquire about the poster. There I traveled on a colorless Sunday afternoon in 
that northern Moabit, a part of town that had already once appeared to me as 
though built by ghostly hands for just this time of day. That was when, four years 
ago, I had come to Liitzow Street to pay customs duty, according to the weight of 
its enameled blocks of houses, on a china porcelain city which I had had sent 
from Rome. There were omens then along the way to signal the approach of a 
momentous afternoon. And, in fact, it ended with the story of the discovery of an 
arcade, a story that is too berlinisch to be told just now in this Parisian space of 
remembrance. Prior to this incident, however, I stood with my two beautiful 
companions in front of a miserable cafe, whose window display was enlivened by 
an arrangement of signboards. On one of these was the legend "Bullrich Salt." It 
contained nothing else besides the words; but around these written characters 
there was suddenly and effortlessly configured that desert landscape of the 
poster. I had it once more. Here is what it looked like. In the foreground, a 
horse-drawn wagon was advancing across the desert. It was loaded with sacks 
bearing the words "Bullrich Salt." One of these sacks had a hole, from which salt 
had already trickled a good distance on the ground. In the background of the 
desert landscape, two posts held a large sign with the words "Is the Best." But 
what about the trace of salt down the desert trail? It formed letters, and these 
letters formed a word, the word "Bullrich Salt." Was not the preestablished 
harmony of a Leibniz mere child's play compared to this tightly orchestrated 
predestination in the desert? And didn't that poster furnish an image for things 
that no one in this mortal life has yet experienced? An image of the everyday in 
Utopia? [Gla,4] 



"The store known as La Chaussee d!Antin had recently announced its new 
inventory of yard goods. Over two million meters of barege, over five million of 
grenadine and poplin, and over diree million of other fabrics — altogether about 
eleven million meters of textiles. Le Tintamarre now remarked, after recommend- 
ing La Chaussee d'Antin to its female readers as the 'foremost house of fashion in 
the world,' and also the 'most dependable': 'The entire French railway system 
comprises barely ten thousand kilometers of tracks — that is, only ten million 
meters. This one store, therefore, with its stock of textiles, could virtually stretch a 
tent over all the railroad tracks of France, "which, especially in the heat of 
summer, would be very pleasant.'" Three or four other establishments of diis 
kind publish similar figures, so that, with all these materials combined, one could 
place not only Paris . . . but the whole departement of the Seine under a massive 
canopy, 'which likewise would be welcome in rainy weather.' But we cam rot help 
asking: How are stores supposed to fi nd room to stock diis gigantic quantity of 



goods? The answer is very simple and, what is more, very logical: each firm is 
always larger than the others. 

"You hear it said: 'La Ville de Paris, the largest store in the capital,' 'Les Villes 
de France, the largest store in the Empire,' 'La Chaussee d'Antin, the largest store 
in Europe,' 'Le Coin de Rue, the largest store in the world.' — 'In the world': that 
is to say, on the entire earth there is none larger; you'd think that would be the 
limit. But no: Les Magasins du Louvre have not been named, and they bear the 
title 'The largest stores in the universe.' The universe! Including Sirius appar- 
ently, and maybe even the 'disappearing twin stars' of which Alexander von 
Humboldt speaks in bis Kosmos." 1 

Here we see the connection between capitalism's evolving commercial adver- 
tising and the work of Grandville. 

< Adolf Ebeling,> Lebende Bilder aus dem modernen Paris, 4 vols. (Cologne, 1863- 
1866), vol. 2, pp. 292-294. [G2,l] 

"Now then, you princes and sovereign states, resolve to pool your riches, your 
resources, your energies in order to ignite, as we do our gas jets, long-extinct 
volcanoes [whose craters, though filled with snow, are spewing torrents of inflam- 
mable hydrogen] ; high cylindrical towers would be necessary to conduct the hot 
springs of Europe into the air, from which — so long as care is taken to avoid any 
premature contact with cooling waters — they will tumble down in cascades [and 
thereby warm the atmosphere]. Artificial concave minors, arranged in a semi- 
circle on mountaintops to refl ect the rays of the sun, would suitably augment the 
tendency of these springs to heat the air." E v. Brandenburg, Victoria! Eine neae 
Welt! Frendevoller Ausnifin Being daraitf, ditfi anf tmserm Planeten, besonders anf der 
von urn bewohnten nbrdlichen Halbkugel eine Male Temperatar-Verdnderimg hinsicht- 
lich der Vermehrung der atmospharischen Warme eingetreten ist,' 2 2nd expanded ed. 
(Berlin, 1835) <pp. 4-5>. D Gas D 

This fanatasy of an insane mind effectively constitutes, under the influence of 
the new invention, an advertisement for gas lighting — an advertisement in the 
comic-cosmic style of Grandville. In general, the close connection between adver- 
tising and the cosmic awaits analysis. [G2,2] 

Exhibitions. "All regions and indeed, retrospectively, all times. From farming and 
mining, from industry and from the machines that were displayed in operation, 
to raw materials and processed materials, to art and the applied arts. In all these 
we see a peculiar demand for premature synthesis, of a kind that is characteristic 
of the nineteenth century in other areas as well: think of the total work of art. 
Apart from indubitably utilitarian motives, the century wanted to generate a 
vision of the human cosmos, as launched in a new movement." Sigf ried Giedion, 
Bauen in Frankreich (Leipzig and Berlin, 1928>, p. 37. But these "premature syn- 
theses" also bespeak a persistent endeavor to close up the space of existence and 
of development. To prevent the "airing-out of the classes." [G2,3] 



Apropos of the exhihition of 1867, organized according to statistical principles: 
"To take a turn ahout this place, circular like the equator, is literally to travel 



around the world, for all nations have come here; enemies are coexisting in peace. 
Just as, at the origin of things, the divine spirit was hovering over the orb of the 
waters, so now it hovers over this orb of iron." ^Exposition universelle de 1867 
illustree: Publication internationale autorisee par la commission imperiale, vol. 
2, p. 322 (cited in Giedion, <Banen in Frankreich,> p. 41). [G2,4] 

In connection with the exhibition of 1867. On Offenbach. "For the past ten years, 
this verve of the comic author and this joyous inspiration of the composer have 
been vying with each other for fantastic and serendipitous effects; but only in 
1867, the year of the Universal Exposition, did they attain the height of hilarity, 
the ultimate expression of their exuberance. 3 The success of this theater company, 
already so great, became delirious — something of which our petty victories of 
today can furnish no idea. Paris, that summer, suffered sunstroke." From the 
speech before the Academie Francaise by Henri Lavedan, December 31, 1899 (on 
the election of Meilhac). [G2a,l] 

Advertising is emancipated in Jugendstil. Jugendstil posters are "large, always 
figurative, refined in their colors but not gaudy; they show balls, night clubs, 
movie theaters. They are made for a frothy life — a life with which the sensual 
curves of Jugendstil are well matched." Frankfurter ^eitmg, signed F. L. On an 
exhibition of posters in Mannheim in 1927. D Dream Consciousness D [G2a,2] 

The first London exhibition brings together industries from around the world. 
Following this, the South Kensington museum is founded. Second world exhibition 
in 1862, likewise in London. With the Munich exhibition of 1875, the German 
Renaissance style comes into fashion. [G2a,3] 

Wiertz on the occasion of a world exhibition: "What strikes one at first is not at all 
the things people are making today but the things they will be making in the future. 
/ The human spirit begins to accustom itself to the power of matter." A. J. Wiertz, 
Oeuvres litteraires (Paris, 1870), p. 374. [G2a,4] 

Talmeyr calls the poster "the art of Gomorrah." La Cite du sang (Paris, 1901), 
p. 286. D Jugendstil D [G2a,5] 

Industrial exhibitions as secret blueprint for museums. Art: industrial products 
projected into the past. [G2a,6] 

Joseph Nash painted a series of watercolors for the king of England showing the 
Crystal Palace, the edifice built expressly for London's industrial exhibition in 
1851. The first world exhibition and the first monumental structure in glass and 
ironl From these watercolors, one sees with amazement how the exhibitors took 
pains to decorate the colossal interior in an oriental-fairy-tale style, and how — 
alongside the assortment of goods that filled the arcaded walks — bronze monu- 



ments, marble statues, and bubbling fountains populated the giant halls. D Iron 
□ Interior D [G2a,7] 



The design for the Crystal Palace is by Joseph Paxton, chief gardener to the duke 
of Devonshire, for whom he had built a conservatory (greenhouse) of glass and 
iron at Chatsworth House. His design provided for fir eproofing, plenty of light, 
and the possibility of speedy and inexpensive assembly, and it prevailed over 
those of the London Building Committee, whose competition was held in vain. 4 

[G2a,8] 

"Yes, long live the beer of Vienna! Is it native to this land that produces it? In 
truth, I do not know. But of one thing, there can be no doubt: it is a refined and 
comforting brew. It is not like the beer of Strasbourg ... or Bavaria. ... It is 
divine beer, . . . clear as the thought of a poet, light as a swallow in flight, robust 
and alcohol-charged as the pen of a German philosopher. It is digested like the 
purest water, and it refreshes like ambrosia." Advertisement for Fanta Beer of 
Vienna. No. 4, Rue Halevy, near the Nouvel Opera, New Year's 1866. Almanack 
indicateur parisien (Paris, 1866), p. 13. [G2a,9] 

"Another new word: la reclame (advertisement). Will it make a fortune?" Nadav, 
Quand j'etais photographe (Paris <1900>), p. 309. [G2a,l#] 

Between the February Revolution and the June Insurrection: "All the walls were 
covered with revolutionary posters which, some years later, Alfred Delvau re- 
printed in two thick volumes under the title Les Murailles revolutionnaires, so 
that today we can still get some idea of this remarkable poster literature. There 
was scarcely a palace or a church on which these notices could not be seen. Never 
before was such a multitude of placards on view in any city. Even the government 
made use of this medium to publish its decrees and proclamations, while thou- 
sands of other people resorted to affiches in order to air their views publicly on all 
possible questions. As the time for the opening of the National Assembly drew 
near, the language of the posters grew wilder and more passionate. . . . The num- 
ber of public criers increased every day; thousands and thousands of Parisians, 
who had nothing else to do, became news vendors." Sigmund Englander, 
Geschichte der franzdsischen Arbeiter-Associationen (Hamburg, 1864), vol. 2, 
pp. 279-280. [G3,l] 

"A short merry piece that is customarily presented here before the performance of 
a new play: Harlequin afficheur <Harlequin the Bill-Sticker >. In one quite funny 
and charming scene, a poster for the comedy is stuck on Columbine's house." J. F. 
Reichardt, Vertraute Briefe aus Paris (Hamburg, 1805), vol. 1, p. 457. [G3,2] 

"These days, a good many houses in Paris appear to be decorated in the style of 
Harlequin's costume; I mean a patchwork of large green, yellow, [a word illegible] 
and pink pieces of paper. The bill-stickers wrangle over the walls and come to 



blows over a streetcorner. The best of it is that all these posters cover one another 
up at least ten times a day." Eduard Kroloff , Schilderungen aus Paris (Hamburg, 
1839), vol. 2, p. 57. [G3,3] 



"Paul Siraudin, born in 1814., has been active in the theater since 1835; he has 
supplemented this activity with practical efforts in the field of confectionery. The 
results of these efforts beckon no less temptingly from the large display window in 
the Rue de la Paix than the sugar almonds, bonbons, honey cakes, and sweet 
crackers offered to the public in the form of one-act dramatic sketches at the 
Palais-Royal." Rudolf Gottschall, "Das Theater und Drama des Second Empire," 
in Unsere Zeit: Deutsche Revue — Monatsschrift zum Conversationslexicon 
(Leipzig, 1867), p. 933. [G3,4] 

From Coppee's speech to the Academie Francaise ("Response to Heredia," May 
30, 1895), it can be inferred that a strange sort of written image could formerly be 
seen in Paris: "Calligraphic masterpieces which, in the old days, were exhibited on 
every streetcorner, and in which we could admire the portrait of Beranger or 'The 
Taking of the Bastille' in the form of paraphs" <p. 46>. [G3 ,5] 

Le Charivari of 1836 has an illustration showing a poster that covers half a 
housefront. The windows are left uncovered, except for one, it seems. Out of 
that a man is leaning while cutting away the obstructing piece of paper. 

[G3,6] 

"Essence d'Amazilly, fragrance and antiseptic, hygienic toiletries from Duprat 
and Company." "If we have named our essence after the daughter of a cacique, it 
is only to indicate that the vegetal ingredients to which this distillation owes its 
surprising effectiveness come from the same torrid climate as she does. The term 
'antiseptic' belongs to the lexicon of science, and we use it only to point out that, 
apart from the incomparable benefits our product offers to ladies, it possesses 
hygienic virtues calculated to win the confidence of all those willing to be convinced 
of its salutary action. For if our lotion, unlike the waters of the Fountain of Youth , 
has no power to wash away the accumulated years, at least it does have, in addi- 
tion to other merits, the inestimable advantage (we believe) of restoring to the full 
extent of its former radiance the lost majesty of that consummate entity, that 
masterpiece of Creation which, with the elegance, purity, and grace of its forms, 
makes up the lovelier half of humanity. Without the providential supervention of 
our discovery, this most brilliant and delicate ornament — resembling, in the ten- 
der charms of its mysterious structure, a fragile blossom that wilts at the first hard 
rain — would enjoy, at best, but a fugitive splendor, after the fading of which it 
must needs languish under the ruinous cloud of illness, the fatiguing demands of 
nursing, or the no less injurious embrace of the pitiless corset. Developed, above 
all, in the interests of ladies, our Essence d'Amazilly answers to the most exacting 
and most intimate requirements of their toilette. It unites, thanks to a happy 
infusion, all that is necessary to revive, foster, and enhance natural attractions, 



without the slightest detriment." (Cited in> Charles Simond, Paris de 1800 a 1900 
(Paris, 1900), vol. 2, p. 510 ("Une Reclame de parfumeur en 1857")/' [G3a,l] 



"Gravely, the sandwich-man bears his double burden, light as it is. A young lady 
whose rotundity is only temporary smiles at the walking poster, yet wishes to read 
it even as she smiles. The happy author of her abdominal salience likewise bears a 
burden of his own." <The husband has his wife on his right arm and a large box 
under his left. Along with four other people, they are clustered around a sand- 
wich-man seen from the haclo Text accompanying a lithograph entitled 
"L'Homme-affiche sur la Place des Victoires," from Nouveaux Tableaux de Paris, 
text to plate 63 [the lithographs are by Marie t]. This hook is a sort of Hogaith ad 
usum Delphini. [G3a,2] 

Beginning of Alfred Delvau's preface to Les Murailles revolutionnaires: "These 
revolutionary placards — at the bottom of which we set our obscure name — form 
an immense and unique composition, one without precedent, we believe, in the 
history of books. They are a collective work. The author is Monsieur Everyone — 
Mein Herr Omnes, as Luther says." Les Murailles revolutionnaires de 1848, 16th 
ed. (Paris <1852>), vol. 1, p. 1 . [G3a,3] 

"When, in 1798, under the Directory, the idea of puhlic exhibitions was inaugu- 
rated on the Champ de Mars, there were 110 exhibitors, of whom twenty-five were 
awarded medals." Palais de I'Industrie (distributed hy H. Plon). [G4,l] 

"Beginning in 1801, the products of newly emerging industries were exhibited in 
the courtyard of the Louvre." Lucien Dubech and Pierre d'Espezel, Histoire de 
Paris (Paris, 1926), p. 335. [G4,2] 

"Every fi ve years — in 1834, 1839, and 1844 — the products of industry are exhib- 
ited in Marigny Square." Duhech and d'Espezel, Histoire de Paris, p. 389. 

[G4,3] 

"The first exhibition dates back to 1798; set up on the Champ de Mars, it was . . . 
an exhihition of the products of French industry and was conceived by Francois de 
Neufchateau. There were three national exhibitions under the Empire (in 1801, 
1802, and 1806), the first two in the courtyard of the Louvre, the third at the 
Invalides. There were three during the Restoration (in 1819, 1823, and 1827), all 
at the Louvre; three during the July Monarchy (in 1834 , 1839, and 1844), on the 
Place de la Concorde and the Champs-Elysees; and one under the Second Repuh- 
lic, in 1849. Then, following the example of England, which had organized an 
international exhibition in 1851, Imperial France held world exhibitions on the 
Champ de Mars in 1855 and 1867. The fi rst saw the birth of the Palais de I'Indus- 
trie, demolished during the Republic; the second was a delirious festival marking 
the high point of the Second Empire. In 1878, a new exhihition was organized to 
attest to rehirth after defeat; it was held on the Champ de Mars in a temporary 



palace erected by Formige. It is characteristic of these enormous fairs to be 
ephemeral, yet each of them has left its trace in Paris. The exhibition of 1878 was 
responsible for the Trocadero, that eccentric palace clapped down on the top of 
Chaillot by Davioud and Boivrdais, and also for the footbridge at Passy, built to 
replace the Pont d'lena, which was no longer usable. The exhibition of 1889 left 
behind the Galerie des Machines, which was eventually torn down, although the 
Eiffel Tower still stands." Dubech and d'Espezel, Histoire de Paris (Paris, 1926), 
p. 461. [G4,4] 

'"Europe is off to view the merchandise,' said Renan — contemptuously — of the 
1855 exhibition." Paul Morand, 1900 (Paris, 1931), p. 71. [G4,5] 

'"This year has been lost for propaganda,' says a socialist orator at the congress of 
1900." Paul Morand, 1900 (Paris, 1931), p. 129. [G4,6] 

"In 1798, a universal exposition of industry was announced; it was to take place 
... on the Champ de Mars. The Directory had charged the minister of the interior, 
Francois de Neuf chateau, with organizing a national festival to commemorate the 
founding of the Republic. The minister had conferred with several people, who 
proposed holding contests and games, like greasy-pole climbing. One person sug- 
gested that a great market be set up after the fashion of country fairs, but on a 
larger scale. Finally, it was proposed that an exhibition of paintings be included. 
These last two suggestions gave Francois de Neuf chateau the idea of presenting an 
exhibition of industry in celebration of the national festival. Thus, the first indus- 
trial exposition is born from the wish to amuse the working classes , and it becomes 
for them a festival of emancipation. . . . The increasingly popular character of 
industry starts to become evident. . . . Silk fabrics are replaced by woolens, and 
satin and lace by materials more in keeping with the domestic requirements of the 
Third Estate: woolen bonnets and corduroys. . . . Chaptal, the spokesman for this 
exhibition, calls the industrial state by its name for the first time." Sigmund 
Englander, Geschichte der franzosischen Arbeiter-Associationen (Hamburg, 
1864), vol. 1, pp. 51-53. [G4.7] 

"In celebrating the centenary of the great Revolution, the French bourgeoisie has, 
as it were, intentionally set out to demonstrate to the proletariat ad oculos the 
economic possibility and necessity of a social uprising. The world exhibition has 
given the proletariat an excellent idea of the unprecedented level of development 
which the means of production have reached in all civilized lands — a development 
far exceeding the boldest Utopian fantasies of the century preceding this one. . . . 
The exhibition has further demonstrated that modern development of the forces of 
production must of necessity lead to industrial crises that, given the anarchy cur- 
rently reigning in production, will only grow more acute with the passage of time, 
and hence more destructive to the course of the world economy." G. Plekhanov, 
"Wie die Bourgeoisie ihrer Revolution gedenkt," Die neue Zeit, 9, no. 1 (Stuttgart, 
1891), p. 138. [G4a,l] 



"Despite all the posturing with which Teutonic arrogance tries to represent the 
capital of the Reich as the brightest beacon of civilization, Berlin has not yet been 
able to mount a world exhibition. ... To try to excuse this deplorable fact by 
claiming that world exhibitions have had their day and now are nothing but gaudy 
and grandiose vanity fairs, and so forth, is a crass evasion. We have no wish to 
deny the drawbacks of world exhibitions . . . ; nevertheless, in every case they 
remain incomparably more powerful levers of human culture than the countless 
barracks and churches with which Berlin has been inundated at such great cost. 
The recurrent initiatives to establish a world exhibition have foundered, first of 
all, on the lack of energy . . . afflicting the bourgeoisie, and, second, on the poorly 
disguised resentment with which an absolutist-feudal militarism looks on anything 
that could threaten its — alas! — still germinating roots." <Anonymous,> "Klass- 
enkampfe," Die neue Zeit, 12, no. 2 (Stuttgart, 1894), p. 257. [G4a,2] 

On the occasion of the world exhibition of 1867, Victor Hugo issued a manifesto to 
the peoples of Europe. [G4a,3] 

Chevalier was a disciple of Enfantin. Editor of he Globe. [G4a,4] 

Apropos of Roland de la Platiere's Encyclopedic methodique: "Turning to les 
manufactures, . . . Roland writes: 'Industry is born of need. . . .' It might appear 
from this that the term is being used in the classical sense of industria. What 
follows provides clarification: 'But this fecund and perverse riverhead, of irregu- 
lar and retrogressive disposition, eventually came down from the uplands to flood 
the fields, and soon nothing could satisfy the need which overspread the land.' . . . 
What is significant is his ready employment of the word industrie, more than thirty 
years before the work of Chaptal." Henri Hauser, Les Debuts du capitalisme 
(Paris, 1931), pp. 315-316. [G4a,5] 

"With price tag affixed, the commodity comes on the market. Its material quality 
and individuality are merely an incentive for buying and selling; for the social 
measure of its value, such quality is of no importance whatsoever. The commodity 
has become an abstraction. Once escaped from the hand of the producer and 
divested of its real particularity, it ceases to be a product and to he ruled over by 
human beings. It has acquired a 'ghostly objectivity' and leads a life of its own. 'A 
commodity appears, at fi rst sight, to be a trivial and easily understood thing. Our 
analysis shows that, in reality, it is a vexed and complicated thing, abounding in 
metaphysical subtleties and theological niceties.' Cut off from the will of man, it 
aligns itself in a mysterious hierarchy, develops or declines exchangeability, and, 
in accordance withits own peculiar laws, performs as an actor on a phantom stage. 
In the language of the commodities exchange, cotton 'soars,' copper 'slumps,' 
corn 'is active,' coal 'is sluggish,' wheat 'is on the road to recovery,' and petro- 
leum 'displays a healthy trend.' Things have gained autonomy, and they take on 
human features. . . . The commodity has been transformed into an idol that, al- 
though the product of human hands, disposes over the human. Marx speaks of the 



fetish character of the commodity. 'This fetish character of the commodity world 
has its origin in the peculiar social character of the labor that produces commodi- 
ties. ... It is only the particular social relation between people that here assumes, 
in the eyes of these people, the phantasmagorical form of a relation between 
things.'" 6 Otto Riihle, KarlMarx (Hellerau <1928>), pp. 384-385. [G5,l] 

"According to official estimates, a total of about 750 workers, chosen by their 
comrades or else named by the entrepreneurs themselves, visited London's world 
exhibition in 1862. . . . The official character of this delegation, and the manner in 
which it was constituted, naturally inspired little confidence in the revolutionary 
and republican emigres from France. This circumstance perhaps explains why the 
idea of an organized reception for this deputation originated with the editors of an 
organ dedicated to the cooperative movement. ... At the urging of the editorial 
staff of The Working Man, a committee was formed to prepare a welcome for the 
French workers .... Those named to participate included . . . J . Morton Peto, . . . 
and Joseph Paxton. . . . The interests of industry were put foremost, . . . and the 
need for an agreement between workers and entrepreneurs, as the sole means of 
bettering the difficult condition of the workers, was strongly underlined. . . . We 
cannot . . . regard this gathering as the birthplace ... of the International Work- 
ingmen's Association. That is a legend. . . . The truth is simply that this visit 
acquired, through its indirect consequences, momentous importance as a key step 
on the way to an understanding between English and French workers." 
D. Rjazanov, "Zur Geschichte der ersten Internationale," in Marx-Engels Archiv, 
vol. 1 (Frankfurt am Main, 1928>, pp. 157, 159-160. [G5,2] 

"Already, for the first world exhibition in 1851, some of the workers proposed by 
the entrepreneurs were sent to London at the state's expense. There was also, 
however, an independent delegation dispatched to London on the initiative of 
Blanqui (the economist) and Emile de Girardin. . . . This delegation submitted a 
general report in which, to be sure, we find no trace of the attempt to establish a 
permanent liaison with English workers, but in which the need for peaceful rela- 
tions between England and France is stressed. ... In 1855, the second world 
exhibition took place, this time in Paris. Delegations of workers from the capital, 
as well as from the provinces, were now totally barred. It was feared that they 
would give workers an opportunity for organizing." D. Rjazanov, "Zur Geschichte 
del - ersten Internationale," in Marx-Engels Archiv, ed. Rjazanov, vol. 1 (Frank- 
furt am Main), pp. 150-151. [G5a,l] 

The subtleties of Grandville aptly express what Marx calls the "theological nice- 
ties'" of the commodity. [G5a,2] 



"The sense of taste is a carriage with four wheels, which are: (1) Gastronomy, (2) 
Cuisine; (3) Company; (4) Culture." From <Fourier's> ISouveau Monde industriel 
et societaire (1829), cited in E. Poisson, Fourier (Paris, 1932), p. 130. [G5a,3] 



Connection of the first world exhibition in London in 18 51 with the idea of free 
trade. [G5a,4] 



"The world exhibitions have lost much of their original character. The enthusiasm 
that, in 1851, was felt in the most disparate circles has subsided, and in its place 
has come a kind of cool calculation. In 1851, we were living in the era of free 
trade. . . . For some decades now, we have witnessed the spread of protection- 
ism. . . . Participation in the exhibition becomes ... a sort of representation . . . ; 
and whereas in 1850 the ruling tenet was that the government need not concern 
itself in this affair, the situation today is so far advanced that the government of 
each country can be considered a veritable entrepreneur." Julius Lessing, Das 
halbe Jahrhundert der Weltausstellungen (Berlin, 1900), pp. 29-30. [G5a,5] 

In London, in 1851, "appeared . . . the first cast-steel cannon by Krupp. Soon 
thereafter, the Prussian minister of war placed an order for more than 200 exem- 
plars of this model." Julius Lessing, Das halbe Jahrhundert der Weltausstellun- 
gen (Berlin, 1900), p. 11. [G5a,6] 

"From the same sphere of thought that engendered the great idea of free trade 
arose . . . the notion that no one would come away empty-handed — rather, the 
contrary — from an exhibition at which he had staked his best so as to be able to 
take home the best that other people had to offer. . . . This bold conception, in 
which the idea for the exhibition originated, was put into action. Within eight 
months, everything was finished. 'An absolute wonder that has become a part of 
history. ' At the foundation of the entire undertaking, remarkably enough, rests 
the principle that such a work must be backed not by the state but by the free 
activity of its citizens. . . . Originally, two private contractors, the Munday broth- 
ers, offered to build, at their own risk, a palace costing a million marks. But 
grander proportions were resolved on, and the necessary funds for guaranteeing 
the enterprise, totaling many millions, were subscribed in short order. The great 
new thought found a great new form. The engineer Paxton built the Crystal Pal- 
ace. In every land rang out the news of something fabulous and unprecedented: a 
palace of glass and iron was going to be built, one that would cover eighteen acres. 
Not long before this, Paxton had constructed a vaulted roof of glass and iron for 
one of the greenhouses at Kew, in which luxuriant palms were growing, and this 
achievement gave him the courage to take on the new task. Chosen as a site for the 
exhibition was the finest park in London, Hyde Park, which offered in the middle 
a wide open meadow, traversed along its shorter axis by an avenue of splendid 
elms. But anxious onlookers soon raised a cry of alarm lest these trees be sacrificed 
for the sake of a whim. 'Then I shall roof over the trees,' was Paxton's answer, and 
he proceeded to design the transept, which, with its semicylindrical vault elevated 
112 feet above the ground, . . . accommodated the whole row of elms. It is in the 
highest degree remarkable and significant that this Great Exhibition of London — 
born of modern conceptions of steam power, electricity, and photography, and 
modern conceptions of free trade — should at the same time have afforded the 



decisive impetus, within this period as a whole, for the revolution in artistic forms. 
To build a palace out of glass and iron seemed to the world, in those days, a 
fantastic inspiration for a temporary piece of architecture. We see now that it was 
the first great advance on the road to a wholly new world of forms. . . . The con- 
structive style, as opposed to the historical style, has become the watchword of the 
modern movement. When did this idea make its triumphal entry into the world? In 
the year 1851, with the Crystal Palace in London. At first, people thought it impos- 
sible that a palace of colossal proportions could be built f rom glass and iron. In the 
publications of the day, we find the idea of assembling iron components, so famil- 
iar to us now, represented as something extraordinary. England can boast of hav- 
ing accomplished this quite novel task in the space of eight months, using its 
existing factories, without any additional capacity. One points out triumphantly 
that ... in the sixteenth century a small glazed window was still a luxury item, 
whereas today a building covering eighteen acres can be constructed entirely out 
of glass. To a manlike Lothar Bucher, the meaning of this new structure was clear: 
it was the undisguised architectural expression of the transverse strength of slen- 
der iron components. But the fantastic charm which the edifice exerted on all souls 
went well beyond such a characterization, however crucial for the program of the 
future; and in this regard, the preservation of the magnificent row of trees for the 
central transept was of capital importance. Into this space were transported all the 
horticultural glories which the rich conservatories of England had been able to 
cultivate. Lightly plumed palms from the tropics mingled with the leafy crowns of 
the five-hundred-year-old elms; and within this enchanted forest the decorators 
arranged masterpieces of plastic art, statuary, large bronzes, and specimens of 
other artworks. At the center stood an imposing crystal fountain. To the right and 
to the left ran galleries in which visitors passed from one national exhibit to the 
other. Overall, it seemed a wonderland, appealing more to the imagination than to 
the intellect. 'It is with sober economy of phrase that I term the prospect incompa- 
rably fairy-like. This space is a summer night's dream in the midnight sun 1 
(Lothar Bucher). Such sentiments were registered throughout the world. I myself 
recall, from my childhood, how the news of the Crystal Palace reached us in 
Germany, and how pictures of it were hung in the middle-class parlors of distant 
provincial towns. It seemed then that the world we knew from old fairy tales — of 
the princess in the glass coffin, of queens and elves dwelling in crystal houses — had 
come to life . . . , and these impressions have persisted through the decades. The 
great transept of the palace and part of the pavilions were transferred to Syden- 
ham, where the building stands today;" there I saw it in 1862, with feelings of awe 
and the sheerest delight. It has taken four decades, numerous fires, and many 
depredations to ruin this magic, although even today it is still not completely 
vanished." Julius Lessing, Das halbe ] ahrhundert der Weltausstellungen (Berlin, 



1900), pp. 6-10. 



[G6; G6a,l] 



Organizing the New York exhibition of 1853 fell to Phineas Barnum. 



[G6a,2] 



"Le Play has calculated that the number of years required to prepare a world 
exhibition equals the number of months it runs. . . . There is obviously a shocking 



Exterior of the Crystal Palace, London. See G6; G6a,l. 



disproportion here between the period of gestation and the duration of the enter- 
prise." Maurice Pecard, Les Expositions internationales au point de vue econo- 
mique et social, particulierement en France (Paris, 1901), p. 23. [G6a,3] 

A bookseller's poster appears in Les Murailles revolutionnaires de 1848 with the 
following explanatory remark: "We offer this afjiche, as later we shall offer others 
unrelated to the elections or to the political events of the day. We offer it hecause it 
tells why and how certain manufacturers profi t from certain occasions." From the 
poster: "Read this important notice against Swindlers. Monsieur Alexandre 
Pierre, wishing to stop the daily abuses created hy the general ignorance of the 
Argot and Jargon of swindlers and dangerous men, has made good use of the 
unhappy time he was forced to spend with them as a victim of the fallen Govern- 
ment; now restored to liberty by our noble Repuhlic, he has just puhlished the 
fruit of those sad studies he was able to make in prison. He is not afraid to descend 



into the midst «f these horrible places, and even into the Lions' Den, if hy these 
means ... he can shed light on the principal words of their conversations, and 
thus make it possible to avoid the misfortunes and abuses that result from not 
knowing these words, which until now were intelligible only to swindlers. . . . On 
sale from public vendors and from the Author." Les Murailles revolutionnaires de 
1848 (Paris <1852>), vol. 1, p. 320. [G7,l] 

If the commodity was a fetish, then Grandville was the tribal sorcerer. [G7,2] 

Second Empire: "The government's candidates . . . were able to print their procla- 
mations on white paper, a color reserved exclusively for official publications." 
A. Malet and P. Grillet, XIX" siecle (Paris, 1919), p. 271. [G7,3] 

Injugendstil we see, for the first time, the integration of the human body into 
advertising. D Jugendstil □ [G7,4] 

Worker delegations at the world exhibition of 1867. At the top of the agenda is the 
demand for the abrogation of Article 1781 of the Civil Code, which reads: "The 
employer's word shall be taken as true in his statement of wages apportioned, of 
salary paid for the year ended, and of accounts given for the current year" 
(p. 140). — "The delegations of workers at the exhibitions of London and Paris in 
1862 and in 1867 gave a direction to the social movement of the Second Empire, 
and even, we may say, to that of the second half of the nineteenth century. . . . 
Their reports were compared to the records of the Estates General; the former 
were the signal for a social evolution, just as the latter, in 1789, had been the cause 
of a political and economic revolution" (p. 207). — [This comparison comes from 
Michel Chevalier.] Demand for a ten-hour workday (p. 121). — "Four hundred 
thousand free tickets were distributed to the workers of Paris and various 
departements . A barracks with more than 30,000 beds was put at the disposal of 
the visiting workers" (p. 84). Henry Fougere, Les Delegations ouvrieres aux expo- 
sitions universelles (Montlucon, 1905). [G7,5] 

Gatherings of worker delegations of 1867 at the "training ground of the Passage 
Raoul." Fougere, p. 85. [G7a,l] 

"The exhibition had long since closed, but the delegates continued their discus- 
sions, and the parliament of workers kept holding sessions in the Passage Raoul." 
Henry Fougere, Les Delegations ouvrieres aux expositions universelles sous le 
second empire (Montlucon, 1905), pp. 86-87. Altogether, the sessions lasted from 
July 21,1867, until July 14, 1869. [G7a,2] 

International Association of Workers. '"The Association . . . dates from 1862, 
from the time of the world exhibition in London. It was there that English and 
French workers first met, to hold discussions and seek mutual enlightenment.' 
Statement made by M. Tolain on March 6, 1868, . . . during thefirst suit brought 



by the government against the International Association of Workers." Henry 
Fougere, Les Delegations ouvrieres aux expositions universelles sous le second 
empire (Montlucon, 1905), p. 75. The first great meeting in London drafted a 
declaration of sympathy for the liberation of the Poles. [G7a,3] 

In the three or four reports by the worker delegations who took part in the world 
exhibition of 1867, there are demands for the abolition of standing armies and for 
general disarmament. Delegations of porcelain painters, piano repairmen, shoe- 
makers, and mechanics. See Fougere, pp. 163-164.. [G7a,4] 

1867. "Whoever visited the Champ de Mars for the first time got a singular impres- 
sion. Arriving by the central avenue, he saw at first . . . only iron and smoke. . . . 
This initial impression exerted such an influence on the visitor that, ignoring the 
tempting diversions offered by the arcade, he would hasten toward the movement 
and noise that attracted him. At every point . . . where the machines were momen- 
tarily still, he could hear the strains of steam-powered organs and the symphonies 
of brass instruments." A. S. de Doncourt, Les Expositions universelles (Lille and 
Paris <1889>), pp. 111-112. [G7a,5] 

Theatrical works pertaining to the world exhibition of 1855: Paris trop petit, 
August 4, 1855, Theatre du Luxembourg; Paul Meurice, Paris, July 21, Porte- 
Saint-Martin; Theodore Barriere and Paul de Kock, L 'Histoire de Paris and Les 
Grands Siecles, September 29; Les Modes de Vex position; Dzim boom boom: Re- 
vue de V exhibition; Sebastien Rheal, La Vision de Faustus, ou L 'Exposition uni- 
verselle de 1855. In Adolphe Demy, Esstii historique sur les expositions 
universelles de Paris (Paris, 1907), p. 90. [G7a,6] 

London's world exhibition of 1862: "No trace remained of the edifying impression 
made hy the exhibition of 1851. . . . Nevertheless, this exhibition had some note- 
worthy results. . . . The greatest surprise . . . came from China. Up l:o this time, 
Europe had seen nothing of Chinese art except . . . the ordinary porcelains sold on 
the market. But now I he Anglo-Chinese war had taken place . . ., and the Summer 
Palace had been burned to the ground, supposedly as punishment. '' In truth, 
however, the English had succeeded even more than their allies, the French, in 
carrying away a large portion of the treasures amassed in that palace, and these 
treasures were subsequently put on exhibit in London in 1862. For the sake of 
discretion, it was women rather than men . . . who acted as exhibitors." Julius 
Lessing, Das halbe Jahrhundert der Weltausstellungen (Berlin, 1900), p. 16. 

[G8.1] 

Lessing (Das halbe Jahrhundert der Weltausstellungen [Berlin, 1900], p. 4) 
points up the difference between the world exhibitions and the fairs. For the latter, 
the merchants hrought their whole stock of goods along with them. The world 
exhibitions presuppose a considerable development of commercial as well as in- 




dustrial credit — that is to say, credit on the part of the customers, as well as on the 
part of the firms taking their orders. [G8,2] 



"You deliberately had to close your eyes in order not to realize that the fair on the 
Champ de Mars in 1798, that the superb porticoes of the courtyard of the Louvre 
and the courtyard of the Invalides constructed in the following years, and, finally, 
that the memorahle royal ordinance of January 13, 1819,"' have powerfully con- 
tributed to the glorious development of French industry. ... It was reserved for 
the king of France to transform the magnificent galleries of his palace into an 
immense bazaar, in order that his people might contemplate . . . these unblooclied 
trophies raised up by the genius of the arts and the genius of peace." <J»seph- 
Charles> Chenou and H.D., Notice sur V exposition des produits de I'industrie et 
des arts qui a eu lieu a Douai en 1827 (Douai, 1827), p. 5. [G8,3] 

Three different delegations of workers were sent to London in 1851; none of 
them accomplished anything significant. Two were official: one represented the 
National Assembly, and one the municipality of Paris. The private delegation 
was put together with the support of the press, in particular of Emile de Girardin. 
The workers themselves played no part in assembling these delegations. [G8,4] 

The dimensions of the Crystal Palace, according to A. S. Doncourt, Les Exposi- 
tions universelles (Lille and Paris <1889>), p. 12. The long sides measured 560 
meters. [G8,5] 

On the workers' delegations to the Great Exhibition in London in 1862: "Electoral 
offices were being rapidly organized when, on the eve of elections, an incident . . . 
arose to impede the operations. The Paris police . . . took umbrage at this unprece- 
dented development, and the Workers Commission was ordered to cease its ac- 
tivities. Convinced that this measure . . . could only be the result of a mis- 
understanding, members of the Commission took their appeal directly to His 
Majesty. . . . The emperor . . . was, in fact, willing to authorize the Commisssion to 
pursue its task. The elections . . . resulted in the selection of two hundred dele- 
gates .... A period of ten days had been granted to each group to accomplish its 
mission. Each delegate received, on his departure, the sum of 115 francs, a sec- 
ond-class round-trip train ticket, lodging, and a meal, as well as a pass to the 
exhibition. . . . This great popular movement took place without the slightest inci- 
dent that . . . could have been termed regrettable." Rapports des delegues des 
ou.vriers parisiens a Vexposition de Londres en 1862, publies par la Commission 
ouvriere (Paris, 1862-1864) [1 vol.!], pp. iii-iv. (The document contains fifty- 
three reports by delegations from the different trades.) [G8a,l] 

Paris, 1855. "Four locomotives were guarding the hall of machines, like those 
great bulls of Ninevah, or like the sphinxes to be seen at the entrance to Egyptian 
temples. This hall was a land of iron and fire and water; the ears were deafened, 
the eyes dazzled. . . . All was in motion. One saw wool combed, cloth twisted, yarn 



clipped, grain threshed, coal extracted, chocolate refined, and on and on. All 
exhibitors without exception were allowed motility and steam, contrary to what 
went on in London in 1851, when only the English exhibitors had had the benefit of 
fire and water." A. S. Doncourt, Les Expositions universelles (Lille and Paris 



<1889>), p. 53. [G8a,2] 

In 1867, the "oriental quarter" was the center of attraction. [G8a,3] 

Fifteen million visitors to the exhibition of 1867. [G8a,4] 

In 1855, for the first time, merchandise could be marked with a price. [G8a,5] 



"Le Play had . . . understood how necessary it would become to find what we call, 
in modern parlance, 'a draw' — some star attraction. He likewise foresaw that this 
necessity would lead to mismanagement of the exhibitions, and this is the issue . . . 
to which M. Claudio- Janet addressed himself in 1889: 'The economist M. Frederic 
Passy, a worthy man, has for many years now, in his speeches to Parliament and to 
the Academie, been denouncing the abuses of the street fairs. Everything he says 
about the gingerbread fair . . . can also be said (allowing for differences in magni- 
tude) of the great centennial celebration."' A note at this point: "The centennial 
celebration, in fact, was so successful that the Eiffel Tower, which cost 6 million 
francs, had already earned, by the fifth of November, 6,459,581 francs." Maurice 
Pecard, Les Expositions internationales au point de vue economique et sociale, 
particulierement en France (Paris, 1901), p. 29. [G9,l] 

The exhibition palace of 1867 on the Champ de Mars — compared by some to 
Rome's Colosseum: "The arrangement conceived by Le Play, the head of the exhi- 
bition committee, was a most felicitous one. The objects on exhibit were distrib- 
uted, according to their materials, in eight concentric galleries; twelve avenues . . . 
branched out from the center, and the principal nations occupied the sectors cut 
by those radii. In this way, ... by strolling around the galleries, one could . . . 
survey the state of one particular industry in all the different countries, whereas, 
by strolling up the avenues that crossed them, one could survey the state of the 
different branches of industry in each particular country." Adolphe Demy, Essai 
historique sur les expositions universelles de Paris (Paris, 1907), p. 129. — Cited 
here is Theophile Gautier's article about the palace in Le Moniteur of September 
17, 1867: "We have before us, it seems, a monument created on another planet, on 
Jupiter or Saturn, according to a taste we do not recognize and with a coloration to 
which our eyes are not accustomed." Just before this: "The great azure gulf, with 
its blood-colored rim, produces a vertiginous effect and unsettles our ideas of 
architecture.'" [G9,2] 

Resistance to the world exhibition of 1851: "The king of Prussia forbade the royal 
prince and princess . . . from traveling to London. . . . The diplomatic corps re- 
fused to address any word of congratulations to the queen. 'At this moment,' 



wrote . . . Prince Albert to his mother on April 15, 1851, . . . 'the opponents of the 
Exhibition are hard at work. . . . The foreigners, they cry, will start a radical 
revolution here; they will kill Victoria and myself and proclaim a red republic. 
Moreover, the plague will surely result from the influx of such multitudes and will 
devour those who have not been driven away by the high prices on everything.'" 
Adolphe Demy, Essai historique sur les expositions universelles (Paris, 1907), 
p. 38. [G9,3] 

Francois de Neuf chateau on the exhibition of 1798 (in Demy, Essai historique sur 
les expositions universelles). '"The French,' he declared, . . . 'have amazed 
Europe by the swiftness of their military successes; they should launch a career in 
commerce and the arts with just the same fervor'" (p. 14). "This initial exposition 
... is really an initial campaign, a campaign disastrous for English industry" 
(p. 18). — Martial character of the opening procession: "(1) a contingent of trum- 
peters; (2) a detachment of cavalry; (3) the first two squads of mace bearers; (4) 
the drums; (5) a military marching band; (6) a squad of infantry; (7) the heralds; 
(8) the festival marshal; (9) the artists registered in tbe exhibition; (10) the jury" 
(p. 15). — Neuf chateau awards the gold medal to the most heroic assault on English 
industry. [G9a,l] 

The second exhibition, in Year IX," was supposed to bring together, in the court- 
yard of the Louvre, works of industry and of the plastic arts. But the artists 
refused to exhibit their work alongside that of manufacturers (Demy, p. 19). 

[G9a,2] 

Exhibition of 1819. "The king, on the occasion of the exhibition, conferred the 
title of baron on Ternaux and Oberkampf. . . . The granting of aristocratic titles to 
industrialists had provoked some criticisms. In 1823, no new titles were con- 
ferred." Demy, Essai historique, p. 24. [G9a,3] 

Exhibition of 1844. Madame de Girardin's comments on the event, <in> Vicomte de 
Launay, Lettres parisiennes, vol. 4, p. 66 (cited in Demy, Essai historique, p. 27): 
'"Itis a pleasure,' she remarked, 'strangely akin to a nightmare.' And she went on 
to enumerate the singularities, of which there was no lack: the flayed horse, the 
colossal beetle, the moving jaw, the chronometric Turk who marked the hours by 
the number of bis somersaults, and — last but not least — M. and Mme. Pipelet, the 
concierges in Les Mysteres de Paris, 1 ' 2 as angels." [G9a,4] 

World exhibition of 1851: 14,837 exhibitors; that of 1855: 80,000. [G9a,5] 

In 1867, the Egyptian exhibit was housed in a building whose design was based on 
an Egyptian temple. [G9a,6] 



In his novel The Fortress, Walpole describes the precautions that were taken in a 
lodging-house specially designed to welcome visitors to the world exhibition of 



1851. These precautions included continuous police surveillance of the dormito- 
ries, the presence of a chaplain, and a regular morning visit by a doctor. [G10,1] 

Walpole describes the Crystal Palace, with the glass fountain at its center and the 
old elms — the latter "looking almost like the lions of the forest caught in a net of 
glass" (p. 307). He describes the booths decorated with expensive carpets, and 
above all the machines. "There were in the machine-room the 'self-acting mules,' 
the Jacquard lace machines, the envelope machines, the power looms, the model 
locomotives, centrifugal pumps, the vertical steam-engines, all of these working 
like mad, while the thousands nearby, in their high hats and bonnets, sat patiently 
waiting, passive, unwitting that the Age of Man on this Planet was doomed." Hugh 
Walpole, The Fortress (Hamburg, Paris, and Bologna <1933>), p. 306. 13 [G10.2] 

Delvau speaks of "men who, each evening, have their eyes glued to the display 
window of La Belle Jardinere to watch the day's receipts being counted." Alfred 
Delvau, Les Heures parisiennes (Paris, 1866), p. 144 ("Huit heures du soir"). 

[G10.3] 

In a speech to the Senate, on January 31, 1868, Michel Chevalier makes an effort 
to save the previous year's Palace of Industry from destruction. Of the various 
possibilities he lays out for salvaging the building, the most noteworthy is that of 
using the interior — which, with its circular form, is ideally suited to such a pur- 
pose — for practicing troop maneuvers. He also proposes developing the structure 
into a permanent merchandise mart for imports. The intention of the opposing 
party seems to have been to keep the Champ de Mars free of all construction — this 
for military reasons. See Michel Chevalier, Discours sur line petition reclamant 
contre la destruction du palais de VExposition universelle de 1867 (Paris, 1868). 

[G10.4] 

"The world exhibitions . . . cannot fail to provoke the most exact comparisons 
between the prices and the qualities of the same article as produced in different 
countries. How the school of absolute freedom of trade rejoices then! The world 
exhibitions contribute ... to the reduction, if not the abolition, of custom duties." 
Achille de Colusont <?>, Histoire des expositions des produits de I'industrie 
franqaise (Paris, 1855), p. 544. [G10a,l] 

Every industry, in exhibiting its trophies 
In this bazaar of universal progress, 
Seems to have borrowed a fairy's magic wand 
To bless the Crystal Palace. 



Rich men, scholars, artists, proletarians — 
Each one lahors for the common good; 
And, joining together like noble brothers, 
All have at heart the happiness of each. 



ClairviJle and Jules Cordier, he Palais de Cristal, ou Les Parisiens a Londres 
[Theatre de la Porte-Saint-Martin, May 26, 1851] (Paris, 1851), p. 6. [G10a,2] 



The last two tableaux from ClairviJle's Palais de Cristal take place in front of and 
inside the Crystal Palace. The stage directions for the <next to> last tableau: "The 
main gallery of the Crystal Palace. To the left, downstage, a bed, at the head of 
which is a large dial. At center stage, a small table holding small sacks and pots of 
earth. To the right, an electrical machine. Toward the rear, an exhibition of vari- 
ous products (based on the descriptive engraving done in London)" (p. 30). 

[G10a,3] 

Advertisement for Marquis Chocolates, from 1846: "Chocolate from La Maison 
Marquis, 44 Rue Vivienne, at the Passage des Panoramas. — The time has come 
when chocolate praline, and all the other varieties of chocolat defantaisie, will be 
available . . . from the House of Marquis in the most varied and graceful of 
forms. . . . We are privileged to be able to announce to our readers that, once 
again, an assortment of pleasing verses, judiciously selected from among the year's 
purest, most gracious, and most elevated publications, will accompany the exqui- 
site confections of Marquis. Confident in the favorable advantage that is ours 
alone, we rejoice to bring together that puissant name with so much lovely verse." 
Cabinet des Estampes. [G10a,4] 

Palace of Industry, 1855: "Six pavilions border the building on four sides, and 306 
arcades run through the lower story. An enormous glass roof provides light to the 
interior. As materials, only stone, iron, and zinc have been used; building costs 
amounted to 11 million francs. . . . Of particular interest are two large paintings 
on glass at the eastern and western ends of the main gallery. . . . The figures repre- 
sented on these appear to be life-size, yet are no less than six meters high." Acht 
Tage in Paris (Paris, July 1855), pp. 9-10. The paintings on glass show figures 
representing industrial France and Justice. [Gll,l] 

"I have . . . written, together with my collaborators on L'Atelier, that the moment 
for economic revolution has come . . . , although we had all agreed some time 
previously that the workers of Europe had achieved solidarity and that it was 
necessary now to move on, before anything else, to the idea of a political federation 
of peoples." A. Corbon, he Secret du peuple de Paris (Paris, 1863), p. 196. Also 
p. 242: "In sum, the political attitude of the working class of Paris consists almost 
entirely in the passionate desire to serve the movement of federation of nationali- 
ties." [G11.2] 

Nina Lassave, Fieschi's beloved, was employed, after his execution on February 
19, 1836, as a cashier at the Cafe de la Renaissance on the Place de la Bourse. 

[G11.3] 

Animal symbolism in Toussenel: the mole. "The mole is . . . not the emhlem of a 
single character. It is the emblem of a whole social period: the period of industry's 



CO 



infancy, the Cyclopean period. ... It is the . . . allegorical expression of the abso- E 
lute predominance of brute force over intellectual force. . . . Many estimable 
analogists (ind a marked resemblance between moles, which upturn the soil and 
pierce passages of subterranean communication, . . . and the monopolizers of rail- 
roads and stage routes. . . . The extreme nervous sensibility of the mole, which 
fears the light . . . , admirably characterizes the obstinate obscurantism of those g- 
monopolizers of banking and of transportation, who also fear the light." 5 
A. Toussenel, L'Esprit des betes: Zoologie passionnelle — Mammiferes de France ^ 
(Paris, 1884), pp. 469, 473-474. 1 ' 1 [G11.4] | 

Animal symbolism in Toussenel: the marmot. "The marmot . . . loses its hair at its q 

work — in allusion to the painful labor of the chimney sweep, who rubs and spoils g 

his clothes in his occupation." A. Toussenel, L'Esprit des betes (Paris, 1884), ^ 
p. 334. lr ' [Gll,5] 



Plant symbolism in Toussenel: the vine. "The vine loves to gossip . . . ; it mounts 
familiarly to the shoulder of plum tree, olive, or elm, and is intimate with all the 
trees." A. Toussenel, L'Esprit des betes (Paris, 1884), p. 107. [Gll.6] 

Toussenel expounds the theory of the circle and of the parabola with reference 
to the different childhood games of the two sexes. This recalls the anthropo- 
morphisms of Grandville. "The figures preferred by childhood are invariably 
round — the ball, the hoop, the marble; also the fruits which it prefers: the cherry, 
the gooseberry, the apple, the jam tart. . . . The analogist, who has observed these 
games with continued attention, has not failed to remark a characteristic differ- 
ence in the choice of amusements, and the favorite exercises, of the children of 
the two sexes. . . . What then has our observer remarked in the character of the 
games of feminine infancy? He has remarked in the character of these games a 
decided proclivity toward the ellipse. / 1 observe among the favorite games of 
feminine infancy the shuttlecock and the jump rope. . . . Both the rope and the 
cord describe parabolic or elliptical curves. Why so? Why, at such an early age, 
tliis preference of the minor sex for the elliptical curve, this manifest contempt for 
marbles, ball, and top? Because the ellipse is the curve of love, as the circle is that 
of friendship. The ellipse is the figure in which God . . . has profiled the form of 
His favorite creatures — woman, swan, Arabian horse, dove; the ellipse is the 
essentially attractive form. . . . Astronomers were generally ignorant as to why 
the planets describe ellipses and not circumferences around their pivot of attrac- 
tion; they now know as much about this mystery as I do." A. Toussenel, L'Esprit 
des betes, pp. 89-91. 16 [Glla.l] 



Toussenel posits a symbolism of curves, according to which the circle represents 
friendship; the ellipse, love; the parabola, the sense of family; the hyperbola, 
ambition. In the paragraph concerning the hyperbola, there is a passage closely 
related to Grandville: "The hyperbola is the curve of ambition. . . . Admire die 
determined persistence of the ardent asymptote pursuing the hyperbola in head- 



long eagerness: it approaches, always approaches, its goal . . . but never attains 
it." A. Toussenel, LEsprit des betes (Paris, 1884), p. 92. 17 [Glla,2] 



Animal symbolism in Toussenel: the hedgehog. "Gluttonous and repulsive, it is 
also the portrait of the scurvy slave of the pen, trafficking with all subjects, selling 
postmaster's appointments and theater passes, . . . and drawing . . . from his 
sorry Christian conscience pledges and apologies at fixed prices. ... It is said that 
the hedgehog is the only quadruped of France on which the venom of the viper has 
no effect. I should have guessed this exception merely from analogy. . . . For 
explain . . . how calumny (the viper) can sting the literary blackguard." 
A. Toussenel, L'Esprit des betes (Paris, 1884), pp. 476, 478. 1(i [Glla,3] 

"Lightning is the kiss of clouds, stormy but faithful. Two lovers who adore each 
other, and who will tell it in spite of all ohstacles, are two clouds animated with 
opposite electricities, and swelled with tragedy." A. Toussenel, L'Esprit des betes: 
Zoologie passionnelle — Mammiferes de France, 4th ed. (Paris, 1884), pp. 100- 
101. 19 [G12.1] 

The first edition of Toussenel's L'Esprit des betes appeared in 1847. [G12,2] 

"I have vainly questioned the archives of antiquity to find traces of the setter dog. 
I have appealed to the memory of the most lucid somnambulists to ascertain the 
epoch when this race appeared. All the information I could procure . . . leads to 
this conclusion: the setter dog is a creation of modern times." A. Toussenel, L'Es- 
prit des betes (Paris, 1884), p. 159. 20 [G12.3] 

"A heautiful young woman is a true voltaic cell, ... in which the captive fluid is 
retained by the form of surfaces and the isolating virtue of the hair; so that when 
this fluid would escape from its sweet prison, it must make incredihle efforts, 
which produce in turn, by influence on bodies differently animated, fearful rav- 
ages of attraction. . . . The history of the human race swarms with examples of 
intelligent and learned men, intrepid heroes, . . . transfixed merely hy a woman's 
eye. . . . The holy King David proved that he perfectly understood the condensing 
properties of polished elliptical surfaces when he took unto himself the young 
Abigail." A. Toussenel, L'Esprit des betes (Paris, 1884), pp. 101-103. 21 [G12,4] 

Toussenel explains the rotation of the earth as the resultant of a centrifugal force 
and a force of attraction. Further on: "The star . . . begins to waltz its frenetic 
waltz. . . . Everything rustles, stirs, warms up, shines on the surface of the globe, 
which only the evening before was entomhed in the frigid silence of night. Marvel- 
ous spectacle for the well-placed observer — change of scene wonderful to behold. 
For the revolution took place between two suns and, that very evening, an ame- 
thyst star made its first appearance in our skies" (p. 45). And, alluding to the 
volcanism of earlier epochs of the earth: "We know the effects which the first waltz 
usually has on delicate constitutions. . . . The Earth, too, was rudely awakened by 



its first ordeal." A. Toussenel, L'Esprit des betes: Zoologie passionnelle (Paris, 
1884), pp. 44^15. [G12.5] 



Principle of Toussenel's zoology: "The rank of the species is in direct proportion to 
its resemblance to the human being." A. Toussenel, L'Esprit des betes (Paris, 
1884), p. i. Compare the epigraph to the work: '"The best thing about man is his 
dog.'— Charlet." [G12a,l] 

The aeronaut Poitevin, sustained by great publicity, undertook an "ascent to Ura- 
nus" accompanied in the gondola of his balloon by young women dressed as 
mythological figures. Paris sous la Republique de 1848: Exposition de la Bib- 
liotheque et des travaux historiques de I* Ville de Paiis (1909), p. 34. [G12a,2] 

We can speak of a fetishistic autonomy not only with regard to the commodity 
but also — as the following passage from Marx indicates — with regard to the 
means of production: "If we consider the process of production from the point of 
view of the simple labor process, the laborer stands, in relation to the means of 
production, ... as the mere means ... of his own intelligent productive activ- 
ity. . . . But it is different as soon as we deal with the process of production from 
the point of view of the process of surplus- value creation. The means of produc- 
tion are at once changed into means for the absorption of the labor of others. It is 
now no longer the laborer that employs the means of production, but the means 
of production that employ the laborer. Instead of being consumed by him as 
material elements of his productive activity, they consume him as the ferment 
necessary to their own life process. . . . Furnaces and workshops that stand idle 
by night, and absorb no living labor, are a 'mere loss' to the capitalist. Hence, 
furnaces and workshops constitute lawful claims upon the night labor of the 
workpeople." 22 This observation can be applied to the analysis of Grandville. To 
what extent is the hired laborer the "soul" of Grandville's fetishistically animated 
objects? [G12a,3] 

"Night distributes the stellar essence to the sleeping plants. Every bird which flies 
has the thread of the infinite in its claw." Victor Hugo, Oeuvres completes (Paris, 
1881), novels, vol. 8, p. 114 (Les Miserables, book 4). 23 [G12a,4] 

Drumont calls Toussenel "one of the greatest prose writers of the century." 
Edouard Drumont, Les Heros et les pitres (Paris <1900>), p. 270 ("Toussenel"). 

[G12a,5] 

Technique of exhibition: "A fundamental rule, quickly learned through observa- 
tion, is that no object should be placed directly on the floor, on a level with the 
walkways. Pianos, furniture, physical apparatus, and machines are better dis- 
played on a pedestal or raised platform. The best exhibits make use of two quite 
distinct systems: displays under glass and open displays. To be sure, some prod- 
ncts, by their very nature or hecause of their value, have to be protected from 



contact with the air or the hand; others benefit from being left uncovered." Expo- 
sition universelle de 1867, a Paris: Album des installations les plus remarquables 
de VExposition de 1862, a Londres, publie par la commission imperiale pour 
servir de renseignement aux exposants des diver ses nations (Paris, 1866) <p. 5>. 
Album of plates in large folio, with very interesting illustrations, some in color, 
showing — in cross-section or longitudinal section, as the case may be — the pavil- 
ions of the world exhibition of 1862. Bibliotheque Nationale, V.644. [G13,l] 

Paris in the year 2855: "Our many visitors from Saturn and Mars have entirely 
forgotten, since arriving here, the horizons of their mother planet! Paris is hence- 
forward the capital of creation! . . . Where are you, Champs-Elysees, favored 
theme of newswriters in 1855? . . . Buzzing along this thoroughfare that is paved 
with hollow iron and roofed with crystal are the bees and hornets of finance! The 
capitalists of Ursa Major are conferring with the stockbrokers of Mercury! And 
coming on the market this very day are shares in the debris of Venus half con- 
sumed by its own flames!" Arsene Houssaye, "Le Paris futur," in Paris et les 
Parisiens au XIX" siecle (Paris, 1856), pp. 458-459. [G13.2] 

At the time of the establishment, in London, of the General Council of the Workers 
International, 24 the following remark circulated: "The child born in the work- 
shops of Paris was nursed in London." See Charles Benoist, "Le 'My the' de la 
classe ouvriere," Revue des deux mondes (March 1, 1914), p. 104. [G13,3] 

"Seeing that the gala ball is the sole occasion on which men contain themselves, let 
us get used to modeling all our institutions on gatherings such as these, where the 
woman is queen." A. Toussenel, Le Monde des oiseaux, vol. 1 (Paris, 1853), 
p. 134. And: "Many men are courteous and gallant at a ball, doubting not that 
gallantry is a commandment of God" (ibid., p. 98). [G13,4] 

On Gabriel Engelmann: "When he published his Essais lithographiques in 1816, 
great care was taken to reproduce this medallion as the frontispiece to his book, 
with the inscription: 'Awarded to M. G. Engelmann of Mulhouse (Upper Rhine). 
Large-scale execution, and refinement, of the art of lithography. Encouragement. 
1816. Henri Bouchot, La Lithographie (Paris <1895>), p. <38>. [G13,5] 

On the London world exhibition: "In making the rounds of this enormous exhibi- 
tion, the observer soon realizes that, to avoid confusion, ... it has been necessary 
to cluster the different nationalities in a certain number of groups, and that the 
only useful way of establishing these industrial groupings was to do so on the basis 
of — oddly enough — religious beliefs. Each of the great religious divisions of hu- 
manity corresponds, in effect, ... to a particular mode of existence and of indus- 
trial activity. "Michel Chevalier, Du Progres (Paris, 1852), p. 13. [G13a,l] 

From the first chapter of Capital: "A commodity appears, at first sight, a very 
trivial thing and easily understood. Its analysis shows that in reality it is a very 



queer thing, abounding in metaphysical subtleties and theological niceties. So far 
as it is a value in use, there is nothing mysterious about it. . . . The form of wood is 
altered by making a table out of it; nevertheless, this table remains wood, an 
ordinary material thing. As soon as it steps forth as commodity, however, it is 
transformed into a material immaterial thing. It not only stands with its feet on the 
ground, but, in the face of all other commodities, it stands on its head, and out of 
its wooden brain it evolves notions more whimsically than if it had suddenly begun 
to dance." 25 Cited in Franz Mehring, "Karl Marx und das Gleichnis," in Karl 
Marx als Denker, Mensch, unci Revolutiondr, ed. Rjazanov (Vienna and Berlin 
<1928>), p. 57 (first published in Die neue Zeit, March 13, 1908). [G13a,2] 

Renan compares the world exhibitions to the great Greek festivals, the Olympian 
games, and the Panathenaea. But in contrast to these, the world exhibitions lack 
poetry. "Twice, Europe has gone off to view the merchandise and to compare 
products and materials; and on returning from this new kind of pilgrimage, no one 
has complained of missing anything." Some pages later: "Our century tends to- 
ward neither the good nor the had; it tends toward the mediocre. What succeeds in 
every endeavor nowadays is mediocrity." Ernest Renan, Essais de morale et de 
critique (Paris, 1859), pp. 356-357, 373 ("La Poesie de l'Exposition"). [G13a,3] 

Hashish vision in the casino at Aix-la-Chapelle. "The gaming table at Aix-la- 
Chapelle is nothing short of an international congress, where the coins of all king- 
doms and all countries are welcome. ... A storm of Leopolds, Friedrich Wilhelms, 
Queen Victorias, and Napoleons rain down ... on the table. Looking over this 
shining alluvium, I thought I could see . . . the effigies of the sovereigns . . . irrevo- 
cably fade from their respective ecus, guineas, or ducats, to make room for other 
visages entirely unknown to me. A great many of these faces . . . wore grimaces . . . 
of vexation, of greed, or of fury. There were happy ones too, but only a few. . . . 
Soon this phenomenon . . . grew dim and passed away, and another sort of vision, 
no less extraordinary, now loomed before me. . . . The bourgeois effigies which 
had supplanted the monarchs began themselves to move ahout within the metallic 
disks. . . that confined them. Before long, they had separated from the disks. They 
appeared in full relief; then their heads hurgeoned out into rounded forms. They 
had taken on . . . not only faces but living flesh. They had all sprung Lilliputian 
bodies. Everything assumed a shape . . . somehow or other; and creatures exactly 
like us, except for their size, . . . began to enliven the gaming table, from which all 
currency had vanished. I heard the ring of coins struck hy the steel of the crou- 
pier's rake, but this was all that remained of the old resonance ... of louis and 
ecus, which had become men. These poor myrmidons were now taking to their 
heels, frantic at the approach of the murderous rake of the croupier; but escape 
was impossible. . . . Then . . . the dwarfish stakes, obliged to admit defeat, were 
ruthlessly captured hy the fatal rake, which gathered them into the croupier's 
clutching hand. The croupier — how horrihle! — took up each small body daintily 
between his fingers and devoured it with gusto. In less than half an hour, I saw 
some half-dozen of these imprudent Lilliputians hurled into the abyss of this terri- 



ble tomb. . . . But what appalled me the most was that, on raising my eyes (alto- 
gether by chance) to the gallery surrounding this valley of death, I noticed not just 
an extraordinary likeness but a complete identity between the several kingpins 
playing the life-sized game and the miniature humans struggling there on the ta- 
hle. . . . What's more, these kingpins . . . appeared to me ... to collapse in des- 
peration precisely as their childlike facsimiles were overtaken hy the formidable 
rake. They seemed to share ... all the sensations of their little doubles; and never, 
for as long as I live, will I forget the look and the gesture — full of hatred and 
despair — which one of those gamhlers directed toward the hank at the very mo- 
ment that his tiny simulacrum, coralled by the rake, went to satisfy the ravenous 
appetite of the croupier." Felix Mornand, La Vic des eaux (Paris, 1862), pp. 219- 
221 ("Abc-la-Chapelle"). [G14] 

It would be useful to compare the way Grandville portrays machines to the way 
Chevalier, in 1852, still speaks of the railroad. He calculates that two locomo- 
tives, having a total of 400 horsepower, would correspond to 800 actual horses. 
How would it be possible to harness them up? How supply the fodder? And, in a 
note, he adds: "It must also be kept in mind that horses of flesh and blood have 
to rest after a brief journey; so that to furnish the same service as a locomotive, 
one must have on hand a very large number of animals." Michel Chevalier, 
Chemins de fer: Extrait du dictionnaire de I'economie politique (Paris, 1852), p. 10. 

[G14a,l] 



The principles informing the exhibition of objects in the Galerie des Machines of 
1867 were derived from Le Play. [G14a,2] 

A divinatory representation of architectural aspects of the later world exhibitions 
is found in Gogol's essay "On Present-Day Architecture," which appeared in the 
mid-Thirties in his collection Arabesques. "Away with this academicism which 
commands that buildings be built all one size and in one style! A city should 
consist of many different styles of building, if we wish it to be pleasing to the eye. 
Let as many contrasting styles combine there as possible! Let the solemn Gothic 
and the richly embellished Byzantine arise in the same street, alongside colossal 
Egyptian halls and elegantly proportioned Greek structures! Let us see there the 
slightly concave milk-white cupola, the soaring church steeple, the oriental miter, 
the Italianate flat roof, the steep and heavily ornamented Flemish roof, the quad- 
rilateral pyramid, the cylindrical column, the faceted obelisk!" 26 Nikolai Gogol, 
"Sur l Architecture du temps present," cited in Wladimir Weidle, Les Abeilles 
d'Aristee (Paris <1936>), pp. 162-163 ("LAgonie de Part"). [G14a,3] 

Fourier refers to the folk wisdom that for some time has defined "Civilization" as 
le monde a rebours <the world contrariwise). [G14a,4] 



Fourier cannot resist describing a banquet held on the banks of the Euphrates to 
honor the victors in both a competition among zealous dam workers (600,000) and 



a contest of pastry cooks. The 600,000 athletes of industry are furnished with 
300,000 bottles of champagne, whose corks, at a signal from the "command 
tower," are all popped simultaneously. To echo throughout the "mountains of the 
Euphrates." Cited in <Armand ancb Maubl<anc, Fourier (Paris, 1937)>, vol. 2, 
pp. 178-179. [G14a,5] 

"Poor stars! Their role of resplendence is really a role of sacrifice. Creators and 
servants of the productive power of the planets, they possess none of their own 
and must resign themselves to the thankless and monotonous career of providing 
torchlight. They have luster without enjoyment; behind them shelter, invisible, 
the living creatures. These slave-queens are nevertheless of the same stuff as their 
happy subjects. . . . Dazzling flames today, they will one day be dark and cold, 
and only as planets can they be reborn to life after the shock that has volatilized 
the retinue and its queen into a nebula." A. Blanqui, L'Eternite par les astres (Paris, 
1872), pp. 69-70. Compare Goethe: "Euch bedaur' ich, ungliickselge Sterne" 
<I pity you, unhappy stars>. 27 [G15,l] 

"The sacristy, the stock exchange, and the barracks — those three musty lairs that 
together vomit night, misery, and death upon the nations. October 1869." Auguste 
Blanqui, Critique sociale (Paris, 1885), vol. 2, p. 351 ("Fragments et notes"). 

[G15,2] 

"A rich death is a closed ahyss." From the fifties. Auguste Blanqui, Critique so- 
ciale (Paris, 1885), vol. 2, p. 315 ("Fragments et notes"). [G15,3] 

An image d'Epinal by Sellerie shows the world exhibition of 1855. [G15,4] 

Elements of intoxication at work in the detective novel, whose mechanism is 
described by Caillois (in terms that recall the world of the hashish eater) : "The 
characters of the childish imagination and a prevailing artificiality hold sway over 
this strangely vivid world. Nothing happens here that is not long premeditated; 
nothing corresponds to appearances. Rather, each thing has been prepared for 
use at the right moment by the omnipotent hero who wields power over it. We 
recognize in all this the Paris of the serial installments of Fantomas." Roger Cail- 
lois, "Paris, mythe moderne," Nouvelle Revue frangaise, 25, no. 284 (May 1, 1937), 
p. 688. [G15.5] 

"Every day I see passing beneath my window a certain number of Kalmucks, 
Osages, Indians, Chinamen, and ancient Greeks, all more or less Parisianized." 
Charles Baudelaire, Oeuvres, <ed. and annotated by Y.-G. Le Dantec (Paris, 
1932),> vol. 2, p. 99 ("Salon de 1846," section 7, "De lTdeal et du modele"). 21! 

[G15,6] 



Advertising under the Empire, according to Ferdinand Brunot, Histoire de la 
langue francaise des origines a 1900, vol. 9, La Revolution et I'Empire, part 9, 



"Les Evenements, les institutions et la langue" (Paris, 1937): "We shall freely 
imagine that a man of genius conceived the idea of enshrining, within the banality 
of the vernacular, certain vocables calculated to seduce readers and buyers, and 
that he chose Greek not only because it furnishes inexhaustible resources to work 
with hut also because, less widely known than Latin, it has the advantage of being 
. . . incomprehensible to a generation less versed in the study of ancient 
Greece. . . . Only, we know neither who this man was, nor what his nationality 
might be, nor even whether he existed or not. Let us suppose that . . . Greek words 
gained currency little by little until, one day, . . . the idea . . . was born . . . that, 
by their own intrinsic virtue, they could serve for advertising. ... I myself would 
like to think that . . . several generations and several nations went into the making 
of that verhal billboard, the Greek monster that entices by surprise. I believe it 
was during the epoch I'm speaking of that the movement began to take shape. . . . 
The age of 'comagenic' hair oil had arrived." Pp. 1229-1230 ("Les Causes du 
triomphe du grec"). [G15a,l] 

"What would a modern Winckelmann say . , . were he confronted hy a product 
from China — something strange, bizarre, contorted in form, intense in color, and 
sometimes so delicate as to he almost evanescent? It is, nevertheless, an example of 
universal beauty. But in order to understand it, the critic, the spectator, must 
effect within himself a mysterious transformation; and by means of a phenomenon 
of the will acting on the imagination, he must learn hy himself to participate in the 
milieu which has given hirth to this strange flowering." Further along, on the same 
page, appear "those mysterious flowers whose deep color enslaves the eye and 
tantalizes it with its shape." Charles Baudelaire, Oeuvres, <ed. Le Dantec (Paris, 
1932),> vol. 2, pp. 144-145 ("Exposition universelle, 1855").-' [G15a,2] 

"In French poetry before Baudelaire, as in the poetry of Europe generally, the 
style and accents of the Orient were never more than a faintly puerile and facti- 
tious game. With Les Fleurs du mal, the strange color is not produced without a 
keen sense of escape. Baudelaire . . . invites himself to absence. ... In making a 
journey, he gives us the feel of . . . unexplored nature, where the traveler parts 
company with himself. . . . Douhtless, he leaves the mind and spirit unchanged; 
but he presents a new vision of his soul. It is tropical, African, black, enslaved. 
Here is the true country, an actual Africa, an authentic Indies." Andre Suares, 
Preface to Charles Baudelaire, Les Fleurs du mal (Paris, 1933), pp. xxv-xxvii. 

[G16.1] 

Prostitution of space in hashish, where it serves for all that has been. 3 * [G16,2] 

Grandville's masking of nature with the fashions of midcentury — nature under- 
stood as the cosmos, as well as the world of animals and plants — lets history, in 
the guise of fashion, be derived from the eternal cycle of nature. When Grand- 
ville presents a new fan as the "fan of Iris," when the Milky Way appears as an 




"avenue" illuminated at night by gas lamps, when "the moon (a self-portrait)" 
reposes on fashionable velvet cushions instead of on clouds, then history is being 
secularized and drawn into a natural context as relentlessly as it was three hun- 
dred years earlier with allegory. [ G 1 6 , 3 ] 

The planetary fashions of Grandville are so many parodies, drawn by nature, of 
human history. Grandville's harlequinades turn into Blanqui's plaintive ballads. 

[G16.4] 

"The exhibitions are the only properly modern festivals." Hermann Lotze, Mi- 
krokosmos, vol. 3 (Leipzig, 1864), p. ? [G16.5] 

The world exhibitions were training schools in which the masses, barred from 
consuming, learned empathy with exchange value. "Look at everything; touch 
nothing." [G16.6] 

The entertainment industry refines and multiplies the varieties of reactive behav- 
ior among the masses. In this way, it makes them ripe for the workings of 
advertising. The link between this industry and the world exhibitions is thus well 
established. [G16.7] 

Proposal for urban planning in Paris: "It would he advisable to vary the forms of 
the houses and, as for the districts, to employ different architectural orders, even 
those in no way classical — such as the Gothic, Turkish, Chinese, Egyptian, Bur- 
mese, and so forth." Amedee de Tissot, Paris et Londres compares (Paris, 1830), 
p. 151. — The architecture of future exhibitions! [G16a.l] 

"As long as this unspeakable construction [the Palace of Industry] survives, ... I 
shall take satisfaction in renouncing the title 'man of letters'. . . . Art and indus- 
try! Yes, it was in fact for them alone that, in 1855, this impossible tangle of 
galleries was reserved, this jumble where the poor writers have not even been 
granted six square feet — the space of a grave! Glory to thee, 0 Stationer. . . . 
Mount to the Capitol, 0 Publisher . . . ! Triumph, you artists and industrials, you 
who have had the honors and the profit of a world exhibition, whereas poor litera- 
ture . . ." (pp. v-vi). "A world exhihition for the man of letters, a Crystal Palace 
for the author-modiste!" Whisperings of a scurrilous demon whom Babou, accord- 
ing to his "Lettre a Charles Asselineau," is supposed to have encountered one day 
along the Champs-Elysees. Ilippolyte Babou, Les Payens innocents (Paris, 1858), 
p. xiv. [G16a,2] 

Exhibitions. "Such transitory installations, as a rule, have had no influence on the 
configuration of cities. ... It is otherwise ... in Paris. Precisely in the fact that 
here giant exhibitions could be set up in the middle of town, and that nearly always 
they would leave hehind a monument well suited to the city's general aspect — pre- 



cisely in this, one can recognize the blessing of a great original layout and of a 
continuing tradition of urban planning. Paris could . . . organize even the most 
immense exhibition so as to be . . . accessible from the Place de la Concorde. Along 
the quays leading west from this square, for a distance of kilometers, the curbs 
have heen set back from the river in such a way that very wide lanes are opened, 
which, abundantly planted with rows of trees, make for the loveliest possihle 
exhibition routes." Fritz Stahl, Paris (Berlin <1929>), p. 62. [Gl6a,3] 