[The Collector] 



All these old things have a moral value. 
— Charles Baudelaire 1 

I believe ... in my soul: the Thing. 
—Leon »eubel, Oeuvres (Paris, 1929), p. 193 



Here was the last refuge of those infant prodigies that saw the light of day at the 
time of the world exhibitions : the briefcase with interior lighting, the meter-long 
pocket knife, or the patented umbrella handle with built-in watch and revolver. 
And near the degenerate giant creatures, aborted and broken-down matter. We 
followed the narrow dark corridor to where — between a discount bookstore, in 
which dusty tied-up bundles tell of all sorts of failure, and a shop selling only 
buttons (mother-of-pearl and the kind that in Paris are called de fantairie) — there 
stood a sort of salon. On the pale-colored wallpaper full of figures and busts 
shone a gas lamp. By its light, an old woman sat reading. They say she has been 
there alone for years, and collects sets of teeth "in gold, in wax, and broken." 
Since that day, moreover, we know where Doctor Miracle got the wax out of 
which he f ashioned Olympia. 2 □ Dolls D [ H 1 , 1 ] 

"The crowd throngs to the Passage Vivieime, where people never feel conspicu- 
ous, and deserts the Passage Colbert, where they feel perhaps too conspicuous. 
At a certain point, an attempt was made to entice the crowd back by filling the 
rotunda each evening with harmonious music, which emanated invisibly from 
the windows of a mezzanine. But the crowd came to put its nose in at the door 
and did not enter, suspecting in this novelty a conspiracy against its customs and 
routine pleasures." Le Livre des cent-et-un, vol. 10 (Paris, 1833), p. 58. Fifteen 
years ago, a similar attempt was made — likewise in vain — to boost the <Berlin> 
department store W. Wertheim. Concerts were given in the great arcade that ran 
through it. [Hl,2] 

Never trust what writers say about their own writings. When Zola undertook to 
defend his Tlierese Raqain against hostile critics, he explained that his book was a 
scientific study of the temperaments. His task had been to show, in an example, 



exactly how the sanguine and the nervous temperaments act on one another — to 
the detriment of each. But this explanation could satisfy no one. Nor does it 
explain the admixture of colportage, the bloodthirstiness, the cinematic goriness 
of the action. Which — by no accident — takes place in an arcade. 3 If this book 
really expounds something scientifically, then it's the death of the Paris arcades, 
the decay of a type of architecture. The book's atmosphere is saturated with the 
poisons of this process: its people drop like flies. [Hl,3] 

In 1893, the cocottes were driven from the arcades. [HI, 4] 

Music seems to have setded into these spaces only with their decline, only as the 
orchestras themselves began to seem old-fashioned in comparison to the new 
mechanical music. So that, in fact, these orchestras would just as soon have taken 
refuge there. (The "theatrophone" in the arcades was, in certain respects, the 
forerunner of the gramophone.) Nevertheless, there was music that conformed 
to the spirit of the arcades — a panoramic music, such as can be heard today only 
in old-fashioned genteel concerts like those of the casino orchestra in Monte 
Carlo: the panoramic compositions of <Felicien> David, for example — Le Desert, 
Christoph Colomb, Herculanum. When, in the 1860s (?), an Arab political delega- 
tion came to Paris, the city was very proud to be able to mount a performance of 
Le Desert for them in the great Theatre de l'Opera (?}. [HI, 5] 

"Cineoramas. The Grand Glohe Celeste: a gigantic sphere forty-six meters in di- 
ameter, where you can hear the music of Saint-Saens." Jules Claretie, La Vie a 
Paris 1900 (Paris, 1901), p. 61. D Diorama D [Hl,6] 

Often these inner spaces harbor antiquated trades, and even those that are 
dioroughly up to date will acquire in them something obsolete. They are the site 
of information bureaus and detective agencies, which there, in the gloomy light 
of die upper galleries, follow the trail of the past. In hairdressers' windows, you 
can see the last women with long hair. They have richly undulating masses of 
hair, which are "permanent waves," petrified coiffures. They ought to dedicate 
small votive plaques to those who made a special world of these buildings — to 
Baudelaire and Odilon Redon, whose very name sounds like an all too well- 
turned ringlet. Instead, they have been betrayed and sold, and the head of 
Salome made into an ornament — if that which dreams of the console diere below 
is not the embalmed head of Anna Czyllak. ' And while these things are petrified, 
the masonry of the walls above has become britde. Brittle, too, are 0 Mirrors □ 
<SeeRl,3.> [Hla.l] 

What is decisive in collecting is that the object is detached from all its original 
functions in order to enter into the closest conceivable relation to things of the 
same kind. This relation is die diametric opposite of any utility, and falls into the 
peculiar category of completeness. What is diis "completeness"? It is a grand 
attempt to overcome the wholly irrational character of the object's mere presence 



at hand through its integration into a new, expressly devised historical system: 
the collection. And for the true collector, every single thing in this system be- 
comes an encyclopedia of all knowledge of the epoch, the landscape, the indus- 
try, and the owner from which it comes. It is the deepest enchantment of the 
collector to enclose the particular item within a magic circle, where, as a last 
shudder runs through it (the shudder of being acquired), it turns to stone. Every- 
thing remembered, everything thought, everything conscious becomes socle, 
frame, pedestal, seal of his possession. It must not be assumed that the collector, 
in particular, would find anything strange in the topos hyperonranios — that place 
beyond the heavens which, for Plato, 5 shelters the unchangeable archetypes of 
things. He loses himself, assuredly. But he has the strength to pull himself up 
again by nothing more than a straw; and from out of the sea of fog that envelops 
his senses rises the newly acquired piece, like an island. — Collecting is a form of 
practical memory, and of all the profane manifestations of "nearness" it is the 
most binding. Thus, in a certain sense, the smallest act of political reflection 
makes for an epoch in the antiques business. We construct here an alarm clock 
that rouses the kitsch of the previous century to "assembly." [Hla,2] 

Extinct nature: the shell shop in the arcades, hi "The Pilot's Trials," Strindberg 
tells of "an arcade with brightly lit shops." "Then he went on into the arcade. . . . 
There was every possible kind of shop, but not a soul to be seen, either behind or 
before the counters. After a while he stopped in front of a big window in which 
there was a whole display of shells. As the door was open, he went in. From floor 
to ceiling there were rows of shells of every kind, collected from all the seas of the 
world. No one was in, but there was a ring of tobacco smoke in the air. . . . So he 
began his walk again, following the blue and white carpet. The passage wasn't 
straight but winding, so that you could never see the end of it; and there were 
always fresh shops there, but no people; and the shopkeepers were not to be 
seen." The unfathomability of the moribund arcades is a characteristic motif. 
Strindberg, Marchen (Munich and Berlin, 1917), pp. 52-53, 59. 6 [Hla,3] 

One must make one's way through Les Flenrs du malWith. a sense for how things 
are raised to allegory. The use of uppercase lettering should be followed carefully. 

[Hla,4] 

At the conclusion oiMatiere et memoire, Bergson develops the idea that perception 
is a function of time. If, let us say, we were to live vis-a-vis some things more 
calmly and vis-a-vis others more rapidly, according to a different rhythm, there 
would be nothing "subsistent" for us, but instead everything would happen right 
before our eyes; everything would strike us. But this is the way things are for the 
great collector. They strike him. How he himself pursues and encounters them, 
what changes in the ensemble of items are effected by a newly supervening 
item — all this shows him his affairs in constant flux. Here, the Paris arcades are 
examined as though they were properties in the hand of a collector. (At bottom, 
we may say, the collector lives a piece of dream life. For in the dream, too, the 



rhythm of perception and experience is altered in such a way that everything — 
even the seemingly most neutral — comes to strike us; everything concerns us. In 
order to understand the arcades from the ground up, we sink them into the 
deepest stratum of the dream; we speak of them as though they had struck us.) 

[Hla,5] 

"'ibur understanding of allegory assumes proportions hitherto unknown to you; 
I will note, in passing, that allegory — long an object of our scorn because of 
maladroit painters, but in reality a most spiritual art form, one of the earliest and 
most natural forms of poetry — resumes its legitimate dominion in a mind illumi- 
nated by intoxication." Charles Baudelaire, Les Paradis artificiels (Paris, 1917), 
p. 73/ (On the basis of what follows, it cannot be doubted that Baudelaire indeed 
had allegory and not symbol in mind. The passage is taken from the chapter on 
hashish.) The collector as allegorist. 0 Hashish D [H2,l] 

"The publication <in 1864> oiL'Histoire de la societefranqaise pendant la Revolu- 
tion et sous le Directoire opens the era of the curio — and the word 'curio' should 
not he taken as pejorative. In those days, the historical curio was called a 'relic.'" 
Remy de Gourmont, Le Deuxieme Livre des masques (Paris, 1924), p. 259. This 
passage concerns a work by Edmond and Jules de Goncourt. [H2,2] 

The true method of making things present is to represent them in our space (not 
to represent ourselves in their space). (The collector does just this, and so does 
the anecdote.) Thus represented, the things allow no mediating construction 
from out of "large contexts." The same method applies, in essence, to the consid- 
eration of great things from the past — the cathedral of Chartres, the temple of 
Paestum — when, that is, a favorable prospect presents itself: the method of re- 
ceiving the things into our space. We don't displace our being into theirs; they 
step into our life. [H2,3] 

Fundamentally a very odd fact — that collector's items as such were produced 
industrially. Since when? It would be necessaiy to investigate the various fash- 
ions that governed collecting in the nineteenth century. Characteristic of the 
Biedermeier period (is this also the case in France?) is the mania for cups and 
saucers. "Parents, children, friends, relatives, superiors, and subordinates make 
their feelings known through cups and saucers. The cup is the preferred gift, the 
most popular kind of knickknack for a room. Just as Friedrich Wilhelmlll filled 
his study with pyramids of porcelain cups, the ordinary citizen collected, in the 
cups and saucers of his sideboard, the memory of the most important events, the 
most precious hours, of his life." Max von Boehn, Die Mode im XIX. Jahrhnn- 
dert, vol. 2 (Mimich, 1907), p. 136. [H2,4] 

Possession and having are allied with the tactile, and stand in a certain opposition 
to the optical. Collectors are beings with tactile instincts. Moreover, with the 
recent turn away from naturalism, the primacy of the optical that was determi- 



nate for the previous century has come to an end. □ Flaneur D Hie flaneur optical, 
the collector tactile. 8 [H2,5] 



Broken-down matter: the elevation of the commodity to the status of allegory. 
Allegory and the fetish character of the commodity. [H2,6] 

One may start from the fact that the true collector detaches the object from its 
functional relations. But that is hardly an exhaustive description of this remark- 
able mode of behavior. For isn't this the foundation (to speak with Kant and 
Schopenhauer) of that "disinterested" contemplation by virtue of which the col- 
lector attains to an unei[ualed view of the object — a view which takes in more, 
and other, than that of the profane owner and which we would do best to 
compare to die gaze of the great physiognomist? But how his eye comes to rest 
on the object is a matter elucidated much more sharply through another consid- 
eration. It must be kept in mind that, for the collector, the world is present, and 
indeed ordered, in each of his objects. Ordered, however, according to a surpris- 
ing and, for the profane understanding, incomprehensible connection. This con- 
nection stands to the customary ordering and schematization of things something 
as their arrangement in the dictionary stands to a natural arrangement. We need 
only recall what importance a particular collector attaches not only to his object 
but also to its entire past, whether this concerns the origin and objective charac- 
teristics of the thing or the details of its ostensibly external history: previous 
owners, price of purchase, current value, and so on. All of these — the "objective" 
data together with the other — come together, for the true collector, in every 
single one of his possessions, to form a whole magic encyclopedia, a world order, 
whose outline is the Jkte of his object. Here, therefore, within this circumscribed 
field, we can understand how great physiognomists (and collectors are physiog- 
nomists of the world of things) become interpreters of fate. It suffices to observe 
just one collector as he handles the items in his showcase. No sooner does he 
hold them in his hand than he appears inspired by them and seems to look 
through them into their distance, like an augur. (It would be interesting to study 
the bibliophile as the only type of collector who has not completely withdrawn 
his treasures from their functional context.) [H2,7; H2a,l] 

The great collector Pachinger, Wolfskehl's friend, has put together a collection 
that, in its array of proscribed and damaged objects, rivals the Figdor collection 
in Vienna. He hardly knows any more how things stand in the world; explains to 
his visitors — alongside die most antique implements — die use of pocket handker- 
chiefs, hand mirrors, and the like. It is related of him that, one day, as he was 
crossing the Stachus, he stooped to pick something up. Before him lay an object 
he had been pursuing for weeks: a misprinted streetcar ticket that had been in 
circulation for only a few hours. [H2a,2] 

An apology for the collector ought not to overlook this invective: "Avarice and 
old age, remarks Gui Patin, are always in collusion. With individuals as with 



societies, the need to accumulate is one of the signs of approaching death. This is 
confirmed in the acute stages of preparalysis. There is also the mania for collec- 
tion, known in neurology as 'collectionism.' / From the collection of hairpins to 
the cardboard box bearing the inscription: 'Small bits of string are useless.'" Les 
Sept Pe'clies capitaux (Paris, 1929), pp. 26-27 (Paul Morand, "L'Avarice"). But 
compare collecting done by children! [H2a,3] 

"I am not sure I should have been so thoroughly possessed by this one subject, hut 
for the heaps of fantastic things I had seen huddled together in the curiosity- 
dealer's warehouse. These, crowding on my mind, in connection with the child, 
and gathering round her, as it were, brought her condition palpably before me. I 
had her image, without any effort of imagination, surrounded and heset by every- 
thing that was foreign to its nature, and farthest removed from the sympathies of 
her sex and age. If these helps to my fancy had all been wanting, and I had been 
forced to imagine her in a common chamber, with nothing unusual or uncouth in 
its appearance, it is very probable that I should have been less impressed with her 
strange and solitary state. As it was, she seemed to exist in a kind of allegory." 
Charles Dickens, Der Raritiitenladen (Leipzig, ed. Insel), pp. 18-19. 9 [H2a,4] 

Wiesengrund, in an unpublished essay on The Old Curiosity Shop, by Dickens: 
"Nell's death is decided in the sentence that reads: 'There were some trilles 
there — poor useless things — that she would have liked to take away; but that was 
impossible.'. . . Yet Dickens recognized that the possibility of transition and dia- 
lectical rescue was inherent in this world of things , this lost, rejected world; and he 
expressed it, better than Romantic nature-worship was ever able to do, in the 
powerful allegory of money with which the depiction of the industrial city ends: 
'. . . two old, hattered, smoke-encrusted penny pieces. Who knows but they shone 
as brightly in the eyes of angels, as golden gifts that have been chronicled on 
tombs?'" 10 [H2a,5] 

"Most enthusiasts let themselves be guided by chance in forming their collection, 
like bibliophiles in their browsing. . . . M. Thiers has proceeded otherwise: before 
assembling his collection, he formed it as a whole in his head; he laid out his plan 
in advance, and he has spent thirty years executing it. . . . M. Thiers possesses 
what he wanted to possess. . . . And what was the point? To arrange around him- 
self a miniature of the universe — that is, to gather, within an environment of eighty 
square meters, Rome and Florence, Pompeii and Venice, Dresden and the Hague, 
the Vatican and the Escorial, the British Museum and the Hermitage, the Alham- 
bra and the Summer Palace. . . . And M. Thiers has been able to realize this vast 
project with only modest expenditures made each year over a thirty-year pe- 
riod. . . . Seeking, in particular, to adorn the walls of lus residence with the most 
precious souvenirs of his voyages, M. Thiers had reduced copies made of the most 
famous paintings. . . . And so, on entering his home, you lind yourself immediately 
surrounded by masterpieces created in Italy during the age of Leo X. The wall 
facing the windows is occupied by The Last Judgment, hung between The Dispute 



of the Holy Sacrament and The School of Athens. Titian's Assumption adorns the 
mantelpiece, between The Communion of Saint Jerome and The Transfiguration. 
The Madonna of Saint Sixtus makes a pair with Saint Cecila, and on the pilaster 
are framed the Sibyls of Raphael, between the Sposalizio and the picture repre- 
senting Gregory IX delivering the decretals to a delegate of the Consistory. . . . 
These copies all heing reduced in accordance with the same scale, or nearly so, . . . 
the eye discovers in them, with pleasure, the relative proportions of the originals. 
They are painted in watercolor." Charles Blanc, Le Cabinet de M. Thiers (Paris, 
1871), pp. 16-18. [H3,l] 

"Casimir Perier said one day, while viewing the art collection of an illustrious 
enthusiast . . . : 'All these paintings are very pretty — but they're dormant capi- 
tal.'. . . Today, . . . one could say to Casimir Perier . . . that . . . paintings . . ., 
when they are indeed authentic, that drawings, when recognizahly by the hand of 
a master, . . . sleep a sleep that is restorative and profitable. . . . The . . . sale of 
the curiosities and paintings of Monsieur R. . . . has proven in round figures that 
works of genius possess a value just as solid as the Orleans <Railroad Co.> and a 
little more secure than bonded warehouses." Charles Blanc, Le Tresor de la cu- 
riosite, vol. 2 (Paris, 1858), p. 578. [H3,2] 

The positive countertype to the collector — which also, insofar as it entails the 
liberation of things from the drudgery of being useful, represents the consumma- 
tion of the collector — can be deduced from these words of Marx: "Private prop- 
erty has made us so stupid and inert that an object is ours only when we have it, 
when it exists as capital for us, or when ... we use it." Karl Marx, Der historische 
Materialismus, in Die Friihschriften, ed. Landshut and Mayer (Leipzig < 193 2 >), vol. 
1, p. 299 ("Nationalokonomie und Pbilosopbie"). 11 [H3 a ,l] 

'''All the physical and intellectual senses have heen replaced hy the simple aliena- 
tion of all these senses, the sense of having. . . . (On the category of having, see 
Hess in Tiventy-One Sheets)." Karl Marx, Der historische Materialismus 
(Leipzig), vol. 1, p. 300 ("Nationalokonomie und Philosophic"). 12 [H3a,2] 



"I can, in practice, relate myself humanly to an object only if the ohject relates 
itself humanly to man." Karl Marx, Der historische Materialismus (Leipzig), vol. 
1, p. 300 ("Nationalokonomie und Philosophic"). 13 [H3 a ,3] 

The collections of Alexandre du Sommerard in the holdings of the Musee Cluny. 

[H3a,4] 

The •(uodlibet has something of the genius of both collector and flaneur. 

[H3 a ,5] 



The collector actualizes latent archaic representations of property. These repre- 
sentations may in fact be connected with taboo, as the following remark indi- 



cates: "It . . . is . . . certain that taboo is the primitive form of property. At first 
emotively and 'sincerely,' then as a routine legal process, declaring something 
taboo would have constituted a title. To appropriate to oneself an object is to 
render it sacred and redoubtable to others; it is to make it 'participate' in oneself." 
N. Guterman and H. Lefebvre, La Conscience mystifiee (Paris, 1936), p. 228. 

[H3a,6] 

Passages hy Marx from "Nationalokonomie und Philosophic": "Private property 
has made us so stupid and inert that an object is ours only when we have it." "All 
the physical and intellectual senses . . . have been replaced by the simple aliena- 
tion of all these senses, the sense of having." 1 ' 1 Cited in Hugo Fischer, Karl Marx 
und sein Verhmltnis zu Staat und Wirtschaft (Jena, 1932), p. 64. [H3a,7] 

The ancestors of Balthazar Claes were collectors. [H3a,8] 

Models for Cousin Pons: Sommerard, Sauvageot, Jacaze. [H3a,9] 

The physiological side of collecting is important. In the analysis of this behavior, 
it should not be overlooked that, with the nest-building of birds, collecting ac- 
quires a clear biological function. There is apparently an indication to this effect 
in Vasari's treatise on architecture. Pavlov, too, is supposed to have occupied 
himself with collecting. [H4,l] 

Vasari is supposed to have maintained (in his treatise on architecture?) that 
the term "grotesque" comes from the grottoes in which collectors hoard their 
treasures. [H4,2] 

Collecting is a primal phenomenon of study: the student collects knowledge. 

[H4.3] 

In elucidating the relation of medieval man to his affairs, Huizinga occasionally 
adduces the literary genre of the "testament": "This literary form can be . . . 
appreciated only by someone who remembers that the people of the Middle Ages 
were, in fact, accustomed to dispose of even the meanest [!] of their possessions 
through a separate and detailed testament. A poor woman bequeathed her Sun- 
day dress and cap to her parish, her bed to her godchild, a fur to her nurse, her 
everyday dress to a beggar woman, and four pounds tournois (a sum which 
constituted her entire fortune), together with an additional dress and cap, to the 
Franciscan friars (Champion, Villon, vol 2, p. 182). Shouldn't we recognize here, 
too, a quite trivial manifestation of the same cast of mind that sets up every case 
of virtue as an eternal example and sees in every customary practice a divinely 
willed ordinance?" J. Huizinga, Herbst des Mittelalters (Munich, 1928), p. 346." 
What strikes one most about this noteworthy passage is that such a relation to 
movables would perhaps no longer be possible in an age of standardized mass 
production. It would follow quite naturally from this to ask whether or not the 



forms of argumentation to which the author alludes, and indeed certain forms of 
Scholastic thought in general (appeal to hereditary authoritary), belong together 
with the forms of production. The collector develops a similar relationship with 
his objects, which are enriched through his knowledge of their origin and their 
duration in history — a relationship that now seems archaic. [H4,4] 

Perhaps the most deeply hidden motive of the person who collects can be de- 
scribed this way: he takes up the struggle against dispersion. Right from the start, 
the great collector is struck by the confusion, by the scatter, in which the things of 
the world are found. It is the same spectacle that so preoccupied the men of the 
Baroque; in particular, the world image of the allegorist caimot be explained 
apart from the passionate, distraught concern with this spectacle. The allegorist 
is, as it were, the polar opposite of the collector. He has given up the attempt to 
elucidate things through research into their properties and relations. He dis- 
lodges things from their context and, from the outset, relies on his profundity to 
illuminate their meaning. The collector, by contrast, brings together what be- 
longs together; by keeping in mind their affinities and their succession in time, he 
can eventually furnish information about his objects. Nevertheless — and this is 
more important than all the differences that may exist between them — in every 
collector hides an allegorist, and in every allegorist a collector. As far as the 
collector is concerned, his collection is never complete; for let him discover just a 
single piece missing, and everything he's collected remains a patchwork, which is 
what things are for allegory from the beginning. On the other hand, the allego- 
rist — for whom objects represent only keywords in a secret dictionary, which will 
make known their meanings to the initiated — precisely the allegorist can never 
have enough of things. With him, one thing is so little capable of taking the place 
of another that no possible reflection suffices to foresee what meaning his profun- 
dity might lay claim to for each one of them.' 6 [H4a,l] 

Animals (birds, ants), children, and old men as collectors. [H4a,2] 

A sort of productive disorder is the canon of the memoir e involontaire, as it is the 
canon of the collector. "And I had already lived long enough so that, for more 
than one of the human beings with whom I had come in contact, I found in 
antipodal regions of my past memories another being to complete the picture. . . . 
In much the same way, when an art lover is shown a panel of an altar screen, he 
remembers in what church, museum, and private collection the other panels are 
dispersed (likewise, he finally succeeds, by following the catalogues of art sales or 
frequenting antique shops, in finding the mate to the object he possesses and 
thereby completing the pair, and so can reconstruct in his mind the predella and 
the entire altar)." Marcel Proust, Le Temps retrouve (Paris), vol. 2, p. 158. 17 The 
memoir e volontaire, on the other hand, is a registry providing the object with a clas- 
sificatory number behind which it disappears. "So now we've been there." ("I've 
had an experience.") How the scatter of allegorical properties (the patchwork) 
relates to this creative disorder is a question calling for further study. [H5,l] 