[The Interior, The Trace] 



"In 1830, Romanticism was gaining the upper hand in literature. It now invaded 
architecture and placarded house facades with a fantastic gothicism, one all too 
often made of pasteboard. It imposed itself on furniture making. 'Allofa sudden,' 
says a reporter on the exhibition of 1834', 'there is boundless enthusiasm for 
strangely shaped furniture. From old chateaux, from furniture warehouses and 
junk shops, it has been dragged out to embellish the salons, which in every other 
respect are modern. . . .' Feeling inspired, furniture manufacturers have been 
prodigal with their 'ogives and machicolations.' You see beds and armoires bris- 
tling with battlements, like thirteenth-century citadels." E. Levasseur, <Histoire 
des classes ouvrieres et de I'industrie en France, de 1789 a 1870 (Paris, 1904), > 



Apropos of a medieval armoire, this interesting remark from Behne". "Movables 
<fumiture> quite clearly developed out of immovables <real estate>." The armoire 
is compared to a "medieval fortress. Just as, in the latter, a tiny dwelling space is 
surrounded in ever-widening rings by walls, ramparts, and moats, forming a 
gigantic outwork, so the contents of the drawers and shelves in the armoire are 
overwhelmed by a mighty outwork." Adolf Behne, Meues Wohnen — M'eues Bauen 



The importance of movable property, as compared with immovable property: 
Here our task is slightly easier. Easier to blaze a way into the heart of things 
abolished or superseded, in order to decipher the contours of the banal as picture 
puzzle — in order to start a concealed William Tell from out of wooded entrails, or 
in order to be able to answer the question, "Where is the bride in this picture?" 
Picture puzzles, as schemata of dreamwork, were long ago discovered by psycho- 
analysis. We, however, with a similar conviction, are less on the trail of the psyche 
than on the track of things. We seek the totemic tree of objects within the thicket 
of primal history. The very last — the topmost — face on the totem pole is that of 



vol. 2, pp. 206-207. 



[11,1] 



(Leipzig, 1927), pp. 59, 61-62. 



[11,2] 



kitsch. 



[11,3] 



The confrontation with furniture in Poe. Struggle to awake from the collective 
dream. [11,4] 



How the interior defended itself against gaslight: "Almost all new houses have 
gas today; it burns in the inner courtyards and on the stairs, though it does not 
yet have free admission to the apartments. It has been allowed into the antecham- 
ber and sometimes even into the dining room, but it is not welcome in the 
drawing room. Why not? It fades the wallpaper. That is the only reason I have 
run across, and it carries no weight at all." Du Camp, Paris, vol. 5, p. 309. 

[11,5] 

Hessel speaks of the "dreamy epoch of bad taste." Yes, this epoch was wholly 
adapted to the dream, was furnished in dreams. The alternation in styles — 
Gothic, Persian, Renaissance, and so on — signified: that over the interior of the 
middle-class dining room spreads a banquet room of Cesare Borgia's, or that out 
of the boudoir of the mistress a Gothic chapel arises, or that the master's study, in 
its iridescence, is transformed into the chamber of a Persian prince. The photo- 
montage that fixes such images for us corresponds to the most primitive percep- 
tual tendency of these generations. Only gradually have the images among 
which they lived detached themselves and settled on signs, labels, posters, as the 
figures of advertising. [11,6] 

A series of lithographs from 18< — > showed women reclining voluptuously on 
ottomans in a draperied, crepuscular boudoir, and these prints bore inscriptions: 
On the Banks of the Tagus, On the Banks $j the Neva, On the Banks of the Seine, and 
so forth. The Guadalquivir, the Rhone, the Rhine, the Aar, the Tamis — all had 
their turn. That a national costume might have distinguished these female figures 
one from another may be safely doubted. It was up to the legende, the caption 
inscribed beneath them, to conjure a fantasy landscape over the represented 
interiors. [11,7] 

To render the image of those salons where the gaze was enveloped in billowing 
curtains and swollen cushions, where, before the eyes of the guests, full-length 
mirrors disclosed church doors and settees were gondolas upon which gaslight 
from a vitreous globe shone down like the moon. [11,8] 

"We have witnessed the unprecedented — marriages hetween styles that one would 
have believed eternally incompatible: hats of the First Empire or the Restoration 
worn with Louis XV jackets, Directory-style gowns paired with high-heeled ankle 
hoots — and, still better, low-waisted coats worn over high-waisted dresses." John 
Grand-Carteret, Les Elegances de la toilette (Paris), p. xvi. [Ila,l] 

Names of different types of traveling car from the early years of the railroad: 
berlin (closed and open), diligence, furnished coach, unfurnished coach. D Iron 
Construction D [Ila,2] 



"This year, too, spring arrived earlier and more heautiful than ever, so that, to tell 
the truth, we coidd not rightly rememher the existence of winter in these parts, nor 



whether the fireplace was there for any purpose other than supporting on its 
mantel the timepieces antl candelabra that are known to ornament every room 
here; for the true Parisian would rather eat one course less per day than forgo his 
'mantelpiece arrangement.'" Lebende Bilder aus dem modernen Paris, 4 vols. 
(Cologne, 1863-1866), vol. 2, p. 369 ("Ein kaiserliches Familienhild"). [Ila,3] 

Threshold magic. At the entrance to the skating rink, to the pub, to the tennis 
court, to resort locations: penates. The hen that lays the golden praline-eggs, the 
machine that stamps our names on nameplates, slot machines, fortunetelling 
devices, and above all weighing devices (the Delphic gnothi seauton 1 of our day) — 
these guard the threshold. Oddly, such machines don't flourish in the city, but 
rather are a component of excursion sites, of beer gardens in the suburbs. And 
when, in search of a little greenery, one heads for these places on a Sunday 
afternoon, one is turning as well to the mysterious thresholds. Of course, this 
same magic prevails more covertly in the interior of the bourgeois dwelling. 
Chairs beside an entrance, photographs flanking a doorway, are fallen household 
deities, and the violence they must appease grips our hearts even today at each 
ringing of the doorbell. Try, though, to withstand the violence. Alone in an 
apartment, try not to bend to the insistent ringing. You will find it as difficult as 
an exorcism. Like all magic substance, this too is once again reduced at some 
point to sex — in pornography. Around 1830, Paris amused itself with obscene 
lithos that featured sliding doors and windows. These were the Images dites a 
portes et a /metres, by Numa Bassajet. [Ila,4] 

Concerning the dreamy and, if possible, oriental interior: "Everyone here dreams 
of instant fortune; everyone aims to have, at one stroke, what in peaceful and 
industrious times would cost a lifetime of effort. The creations of the poets are full 
of sudden metamorphoses in domestic existence; they all rave about marquises 
and princesses, about the prodigies of the Thousand and One Nights. It is an 
opium trance that has overspread the whole population, and industry is more to 
blame for this than poetry. Industry was responsible for the swindle in the Stock 
Exchange, the exploitation of all things made to serve artificial needs, and the . . . 
dividends." Gutzkow, Briefe aus Paris (Leipzig, 1842>, vol. 1, p. 93. [Ila,5] 

While art seeks out the intimate view, . . . industry marches to the fore." Oc- 
tave Mirbeau, in he Figaro (1889). (See Encyclopedic d' architecture [1889] 



On the exhibition of 1867. "These high galleries, kilometers in length, were of an 
undeniable grandeur. The noise of machinery filled them. And it should not be 
forgotten that, when this exhibition held its famous galas, guests still drove up to 
the festivities in a coach-and-eight. As was usual with rooms at this period, at- 
tempts were made — through furniture-like installations — to prettify these twenty- 
five-meter-high galleries and to relieve the austerity of their design. One stood in 
fear of one's own magnitude." Sigfried Giedion, Bauen in Frankreich (Leipzig and 



p. 92.) 



[Ila,6] 



Berlin, 1928>, p. 43. 



[Ila,7] 



Under the bourgeoisie, cities as well as pieces of furniture retain the character of 
fortifications. "Till now, it was the fortified city which constantly paralyzed town 
planning." Le Corbusier, Urbanume (Paris <1925>), p. 249. 2 [Ha,8] 



The ancient correspondence between house and cabinet acquires a new variant 
through the insertion of glass roundels in cabinet doors. Since when? Were these 
also found in France? [Ila,9] 

The bourgeois pasha in the imagination of contemporaries: Eugene Sue. He had 
a casde in Sologne. There, it was said, he kept a harem filled with women of 
color. After his death, the legend arose that he had been poisoned by the Jesuits. :! 

[12,1] 



Gutzkow reports that the exhibition salons were full of oriental scenes calculated 
to arouse enthusiasm for Algiers. [12,2] 

On the ideal of "distinction." "Everything tends toward the flourish, toward the 
curve, toward intricate convolution. What the reader does not perhaps gather at 
first sight, however, is that diis manner of laying and arranging diings also incor- 
porates a setting apart — one that leads us back to the knight. / The carpet in the 
foreground lies at an angle, diagonally. The chairs are likewise arranged at an 
angle, diagonally. Now, diis could be a coincidence. But if we were to meet widi 
this propensity to situate objects at an angle and diagonally in all the dwellings of 
all classes and social strata — as, in fact, we do — then it can be no coincidence. . . . 
In the first place, arranging at an angle enforces a distinction — and this, once 
more, in a quite literal sense. By the obliquity of its position, the object sets itself 
off from the ensemble, as the carpet does here. . . . But the deeper explanation for 
all this is, again, the unconscious retention of a posture of struggle and defense. / 
In order to defend a piece of ground, I place myself expressly on the diagonal, 
because then I have a free view on two sides. It is for this reason that the bastions 
of a fortification are constructed to form salient angles. . . . And doesn't the 
carpet, in this position, recall such a bastion? . . . / Just as the knight, suspecting 
an attack, positions himself crosswise to guard both left and right, so the peace- 
loving burgher, several centuries later, orders his art objects in such a way that 
each one, if only by standing out from all the rest, has a wall and moat surround- 
ing it. He is thus truly a Spiessbiirger, a militant philistine." Adolf Belme, Neues 
Wohnen — Neues Bauen (Leipzig, 1927), pp. 45-48. In elucidating diis point, the 
author remarks half-seriously: "The gendemen who could afford a villa wanted 
to mark their higher standing. What easier way than by borrowing feudal forms, 
knighdy forms?" (ibid., p. 42). More universal is Lukacs' remark that, from the 
perspective of the philosophy of history, it is characteristic of the middle classes 
that their new opponent, the proletariat, should have entered the arena at a 
moment when the old adversary, feudalism, was not yet vanquished. And they 
will never quite have done with feudalism. [12,3] 



Maurice Barres has characterized Proust as "a Persian poet in a concierge's box." 
Could the first person to grapple with the enigma of the nineteenth-century 
interior be anything else? (The citation is in Jacques-Emile Blanche, Mes Modeles 
[Paris, 1929] 7f " [12,4] 



Announcement published in the newspapers: "Notice. — Monsieur Wiertz offers to 
paint a picture free of charge for any lovers of painting who, possessing an original 
Rubens or Raphael, would like to place his work as a pendant beside the work of 
either of these masters." A. J. Wiertz, Oeuvres litteraires (Paris, 1870), p. 335. 

[12,5] 



Nineteenth-century domestic interior. The space disguises itself — puts on, like an 
alluring creature, the costumes of moods. The self-satisfied burgher should know 
something of the feeling that the next room might have witnessed the coronation 
of Charlemagne as well as the assassination of Henri rV, the signing of the Treaty 
of Verdun as well as the wedding of Otto and Theophano. In the end, things are 
merely mannequins, and even the great moments of world history are only 
costumes beneath which they exchange glances of complicity with nothingness, 
with the petty and the banal. Such nihilism is the innermost core of bourgeois 
coziness — a mood that in hashish intoxication concentrates to Satanic content- 
ment, satanic knowing, satanic calm, indicating precisely to what extent the 
nineteenth-century interior is itself a stimulus to intoxication and dream. This 
mood involves, furthermore, an aversion to the open air, the (so to speak) Ura- 
nian atmosphere, which throws a new light on the extravagant interior design of 
the period. To live in these interiors was to have woven a dense fabric about 
oneself, to have secluded oneself within a spider's web, in whose toils world 
events hang loosely suspended like so many insect bodies sucked dry. From this 
cavern, one does not like to stir. 5 [12,6] 



During my second experiment with hashish. Staircase in Charlotte Joel's studio. 
I said: "A structure habitable only by wax figures. I could do so much with it 
plastically; Piscator and company can just go pack. Would be possible for me to 
change the lighting scheme with tiny levers. I can transform the Goethe house 
into the Covent Garden opera; can read from it the whole of world history. I see, 
in this space, why I collect colportage images. Can see everything in this room — 
the sons of Charles III and what you will." 6 [I2a,l] 



"The serrated collars and puffed sleeves . . . which were mistakenly thought to he 
the garh of medieval ladies." Jacob Falke, Geschichte des modernen Geschmacks 
(Leipzig, 1866), p. 347. [I2a,2] 



"Since the glittering arcades have been cut through the streets, the Palais-Royal 
has effectively lost out. Some would say: since the times have grown more virtuous. 
What were once small cabinets particuliers of ill repute have now become smoking 



rooms in coffeehouses. Each coffeehouse has a smoking room known as the di- 
van." Gutzkow, Briefe aus Paris (Leipzig, 1842), vol. 1, p. 226. D Arcades D 

[I2a,3] 

"The great Berlin industrial exhibition is full of imposing Renaissance rooms; even 
the ashtrays are in antique style, the curtains have to he secured with halberds, 
and the bull's-eye rules in window and cabinet." 70 Jahre deutsche Mode (1925), 
p. 72. [I2a,4] 

An observation from the year 1837. "In those days, the classical style reigned, 
just as the rococo does today. With a stroke of its magic wand, fashion . . . 
transformed the salon into an atrium, armchairs into curule seats, dresses with 
trains into tunics, drinking glasses into goblets, shoes into buskins, and guitars 
into lyres." Sophie Gay, Der Salon der Fraulein Contet (in Europa: Chronik der 
gebildeten Welt, ed. August Lewald, vol. 1 [Leipzig and Stuttgart, 1837], p. 358). 
Hence the following: "What is the height of embarrassment?" "When you bring 
a harp to a party and no one asks you to play it." This piece of drollery, which 
also illuminates a certain type of interior, probably dates from the First Empire. 

[I2a,5] 

"As to Baudelaire's 'stage properties' — which were no doubt modeled on the 
fashion in interior decoration of his day — they might provide a useful lesson for 
those elegant ladies of the past twenty years, who used to pride themselves that 
not a single 'false note' was to be found in their town houses. They would do well 
to consider, when they contemplate the alleged purity of style which they have 
achieved with such infinite trouble, that a man may be the greatest and most 
artistic of writers, yet describe nothing but beds with 'adjustable curtains' . . . , 
halls like conservatories . . . , beds filled with subtle scents, sofas deep as tombs, 
whatnots loaded with flowers, lamps burning so briefly . . . that the only light 
comes from the coal fire." Marcel Proust, Chroniques (Paris <1927>), pp. 224-225 7 
(the titles of works cited are omitted) . These remarks are important because they 
make it possible to apply to the interior an antinomy formulated with regard to 
museums and town planning — namely, to confront the new style with the mysti- 
cal-nihilistic expressive power of the traditional, the "antiquated." Which of these 
two alternatives Proust would have chosen is revealed not only by this passage, it 
may be added, but by the whole of his work (compare renferme — "closed-up," 
"musty"). [I2a,6] 

Desideratum: the derivation of genre painting. What function did it serve in the 
rooms that had need of it? It was the last stage—harbinger of the fact that soon 
these spaces would no longer, in general, welcome pictures. "Genre painting. . . . 
Conceived in this way, art could not fail to resort to the specialties so suited to the 
marketplace: each artist wants to have his own specialty, from the pastiche of the 
Middle Ages to microscopic painting, from the routines of the bivouac to Paris 
fashions, from horses to dogs. Public taste in this regard does not discrimi- 



nate. . . . The same picture can be copied twenty times without exhausting de- 
mand and, as the vogue prescribes, each well-kept drawing room wants to have 
one of these fashionable furnishings." Wiertz, Oeuvres litteraires <Paiis, 1870>, 
pp. 527-528. [I2a,7] 

Against the armature of glass and iron, upholstery offers resistance with its 
textiles. [13,1] 

One need only study with due exactitude the physiognomy of the homes of great 
collectors. Then one would have the key to the nineteenth-century interior. Just 
as in the former case the objects gradually take possession of the residence, so in 
the latter it is a piece of furniture that would retrieve and assemble the stylistic 
traces of the centuries. D World of Things D [13,2] 

Why does the glance into an unknown window always find a family at a meal, or 
else a solitary man, seated at a table under a hanging lamp, occupied with some 
obscure niggling thing? Such a glance is the germ cell of Kafka's work. [13,3] 

The masquerade of styles, as it unfolds across the nineteenth century, results 
from the fact that relations of dominance become obscured. The holders of 
power in the bourgeoisie no longer necessarily exercise this power in the places 
where they live (as rentiers) , and no longer in direct unmediated forms. The style 
of their residences is their false iimnediacy. Economic alibi in space. Interior alibi 
in time. [13,4] 

"The art would be to be able to feel homesick, even though one is at home. 
Expertness in the use of illusion is required for this." Kierkegaard, Samtliclie 
Werke <properly: Gesammelte Werke>, vol. 4 <Jena, 19 14>, p. 12 <Stages on Life's 
Way>. 8 This is the formula for the interior. [13,5] 

"Inwardness is the historical prison of primordial human nature." Wiesengrund- 
Adorno, Kierkegaard (Tiibingen, 1933), p. 68.'' [13,6] 

Second Empire. "It is tliis epoch that sees the birth of the logical specialization by 
genus and species that still prevails in most homes, and that reserves oak and solid 
walnut for the dining room and study, gilded wood and lacquers for the drawing 
room, marquetry and veneering for the bedroom." Louis Sonolet, La Vie 
parisienne sous le Second Empire (Paris, 1929), p. 251. [13,7] 

"What dominated this conception of furnishing, in a manner so pronounced as to 
epitomize the whole, was the taste for draped fabrics, ample hangings, and the art 
of harmonizing them all in a visual ensemhle." Louis Sonolet, La Vie parisienne 
sous le Second Empire (Paris, 1929), p. 253. [13,8] 



"The drawing rooms of the Second Empire contained ... a piece of furniture quite 
recently invented and today completely extinct: it was the fumeu.se. You sat on it 
astride, while leaning hack on upholstered arm-rests and enjoying a cigar." Louis 
Sonolet, La Vie parisienne sous le Second Empire (Paris, 1929), p. 253. [13,9] 

On the "filigree of chimneys" as "fata morgana" of the interior: "Whoever raises 
his eyes to the housetops, with their iron railings tracing the upper edge of the long 
gray boulevard blocks, discovers the variety and inexhaustibility of the concept 
'chimney.' In all degrees of height, breadth, and length, the smokestacks rise from 
their base in the common stone flues; they range from simple clay pipes, oftentimes 
half -broken and stooped with age, and those tin pipes with flat plates or pointed 
caps, ... to revolving chimney cowls artfully perforated like visors or open on one 
side, with hizarre soot-blackened metal flaps. ... It is the . . . tender irony of the 
one single form hy which Paris . . . has been able to preserve the magic of inti- 
macy. ... So it is as if the urhane coexistence . . . that is characteristic of this city 
were to be met with again up there on the rooftops." Joachim von Helmersen, 
"Pariser Kamine," Frankfurter Zeitung, Fehruary 10, 1933. [13,10] 

Wiesengrund cites and comments on a passage from the Diary of a Seducer — a 
passage that he considers the key to Kierkegaard's "entire oeuvre": "Environment 
and setting still have a great influence upon one; there is something ahout them 
which stamps itself firmly and deeply in the memory, or rather upon the whole 
soul, and which is therefore never forgotten. However old I may become, it will 
always he impossible for me to think of Cordelia amid surroundings different from 
this little room. When I come to visit her, the maid admits me to the hall; Cordelia 
herself comes in from her room, and, just as I open the door to enter the living 
room, she opens her door, so that our eyes meet exactly in the doorway. The living 
room is small, comfortable, little more than a cahinet. Although I have now seen it 
from many different viewpoints, the one dearest to me is the view from the sofa. 
She sits there by my side; in front of us stands a round tea table, over which is 
draped a rich tahlecloth. On the tahle stands a lamp shaped like a flower, which 
shoots up vigorously to bear its crown, over which a delicately cut paper shade 
hangs down so lightly that it is never still. The lamp's form reminds one of oriental 
lands; the shade's movement, of mild oriental breezes. The floor is concealed hy a 
carpet woven from a certain kind of osier, which immediately hetrays its foreign 
origin. For the moment, I let the lamp become the keynote of my landscape. I am 
sitting there with her outstretched on the floor, under the lamp's flowering. At 
other times I let the osier rug evoke thoughts of a ship, of an officer's cahin — we 
sail out into the middle of the great ocean. When we sit at a distance from the 
window, we gaze directly into heaven's vast horizon. . . . Cordelia's environment 
must have no foreground, hut only the infinite boldness of far horizons" (Gesam- 
melte Schrif te/i (properly: Werke (Jena, 1911)>, vol. 1, pp. 348-349 [Either /Or]). 
Wiesengrund remarks: "Just as external history is 'reflected' in internal history, 
semblance < Schein> is in the interieur space. Kierkegaard no more discerned the 
element of semhlance in all merely reflected and reflecting intrasuhjective reality 



than he sees through the semblance of the spatial in the image of the interior. But 
here he is exposed by the material. . . . The contents of the interior are mere 
decoration, alienated from the purposes they represent, deprived of their own use 
value, engendered solely by the isolated dwelling-space. . . . The self is over- 
whelmed in its own domain by commodities and their historical essence. Their 
semblance-character is historically-economically produced hy the alienation of 
thing from use value. But in the interior, things do not remain alien. . . . Foreign- 
ness transforms itself from alienated things into expression; mute things speak as 
'symbols.' The ordering of things in the dwelling-space is called 'arrangement.' 
Historically illusory <Geschichtlich scheinhafte) ohjects are arranged in it as the sem- 
blance of unchangeable nature. In the interior, archaic images unfold: the image of 
the flower as that of organic life; the image of the orient as specifically the home- 
land of yearning; the image of the sea as that of eternity itself. For the semblance 
to which the historical hour condemns things is eternal." Theodor Wiesengrund- 
Adorno, Kierkegaard (Tiihingen, 1933), pp. 46-48."' [13 a] 

The bourgeois who came into ascendancy with Louis Philippe sets store by the 
transformation of nature into the interior, hi 1839, a ball is held at the British 
embassy. Two hundred r«se bushes are ordered. "The garden," so runs an eye- 
witness account, "was covered by an awning and had the feel of a drawing room. 
But what a drawing room! The fragrant, well-stocked flower beds had turned 
into enormous jardinieres, the graveled walks had disappeared under sumptuous 
carpets, and in place of the cast-iron benches we found sofas covered in damask 
and silk; a round table held books and albums. From a distance, the strains of an 
orchestra drifted into this colossal boudoir." [14,1] 

Fashion journals of the period contained instructions for preserving bouquets. 

[14,2] 

"Like an odalisque upon a shimmering bronze divan, the proud city lies amid 
warm, vine-clad hills in the serpentine valley of the Seine." Friedrich Engels, "Von 
Paris nach Bern," Die neue Zeit, 17, no. 1 (Stuttgart, 1899), p. 10. [14,3] 

The difficulty in reflecting on dwelling: on the one hand, there is something 
age-old — perhaps eternal — to be recognized here, the image of that abode of the 
human being in the maternaJ womb; on the other hand, this motif of primal 
history notwithstanding, we must understand dwelling in its most extreme form 
as a condition of nineteenth-century existence. The originaJ form of all dwelling 
is existence not in the house but in the shell. The shell bears the impression of its 
occupant. In the most extreme instance, the dwelling becomes a shell. The nine- 
teenth century, like no other century, was addicted to dwelling. It conceived the 
residence as a receptacle for the person, and it encased him with all his appurte- 
nances so deeply in the dwelling's interior that one might be reminded of the 
inside of a compass case, where the instrument with all its accessories lies embed- 
ded in deep, usually violet folds of velvet. What didn't the nineteenth century 



invent some sort of casing for! Pocket watches, slippers, egg cups, thermometers, 
playing cards — and, in lieu of cases, there were jackets, carpets, wrappers, and 
covers. The twentieth century, with its porosity and transparency, its tendency 
toward the well-lit and airy, has put an end to dwelling in the old sense. Set off 
against the doll house in the residence of the master builder Solness are the 
"homes for human beings.'" 1 Jugendstil unsettled the world of the shell in a 
radical way. Today this world has disappeared entirely, and dwelling has dimin- 
ished: for the living, through hotel rooms; for the dead, through crematoriums. 

[14,4] 

"To dwell" as a transitive verb — as in the notion of "indwelt spaces"; 13 herewith 
an indication of the frenetic topicality concealed in habitual behavior. It has to do 
with fashioning a shell for ourselves. [14,5] 

"From under all the coral branches and bushes, they swam into view; from under 
every table, every chair; from out of the drawers of the old-fashioned cabinets and 
wardrobes that stood within this strange clubroom — in short, from every hand's- 
hreadth of hiding which the spot provided to the smallest of fi sh, they suddenly 
came to life and showed themselves." Friedrich Gerstacker, Die versunkene Stadt 
(Berlin: Neufeld and Henius, 1921), p. 46. [I4a,l] 

From a review of Eugene Sue's J uif errant (Wandering Jew>, criticized for various 
reasons, including the denigration of the Jesuits and the unmanageable ahundance 
of characters who do nothing hut appear and disappear: "A novel is not a place 
one passes through; it is a place one inhabits." Paulin Limayrac, "Du Roman 
actuel et de nos romanciers," Revue des deux mondes, 11, no. 3 (Paris, 1845), 
p. 951. [I4a,2] 

On literary Empire. Nepomucene Lemercier brings onto the stage, under allegori- 
cal names, the Monarchy, the Church, the Aristocracy, the Demagogues, the Em- 
pire, the Police, Literature, and the Coalition of European powers. His artistic 
means: "the fantastic applied emhlematically." His maxim: "Allusions are my 
weapons; allegory, my buckler." Nepomucene Lemercier, Suite de la Panhy- 
pocrisiade, ou he Spectacle infernal du dix-neuvieme siecle (Paris, 1832), pp. ix, 
vii. [I4a,3] 

From the "Expose preliminaire" to Lemercier's Lampelie et Daguerre: "A short 
preamble is necessary to introduce my audience to the compositional strategy of 
this poem, whose suhject is praise for the discovery made by the illustrious artist 
M. Daguerre; this is a discovery of equal interest to the Academy of Science and 
the Academy of Fine Arts, for it concerns the study of drawing as much as the 
study of physics. . . . On the occasion of such an homage, I would like to see a new 
invention in poetry applied to this extraordinary discovery. Wc know that ancient 
mythology . . . explained natural phenomena by symbolic beings, active repre- 
sentations of the particular principles embodied in things. . . . Modern imitations 



have, up to now, borrowed only the forms of classical poetry; I am endeavoring to 
appropriate for us the principle and the substance. The tendency of the versifiers 
of our century is to reduce the art of the muses to practical and trivial realities, 
easily comprehensible hy the average person. This is not progress but decadence. 
The original enthusiasm of the ancients, hy contrast, tended to elevate the human 
intelligence hy initiating it into those secrets of nature revealed by the elegantly 
ideal fahles. ... It is not without encouragement that I lay bare for yon the foun- 
dations of my theory, which I have applied ... to Newtonian philosophy in my 
Atlantiade. The learned geometer Lagrange has been so generous as to voice ap- 
proval of my attempt to create for our modern muses that great rarity: a theoso- 
phy . . . conforming to acquired knowledge." Nepomucene Lemercier, Sur la 
Decouverte de I'ingenieux peintre du diorama: Seance publique annuelle des cinq 
academies de jeudi 2 mai 1839 (Paris, 1839), pp. 21-23. [I4a,4] 

On the illusionistic painting of the Juste Milieu: l,i "The painter must ... be a good 
dramatist, a good costumer, and a skillful director. . . . The public ... is much 
more interested in the subject than in the artistic qualities. 'Isn't the most difficult 
thing the blending of colors? — No, responds a connoisseur, it's getting the fish's 
scales right. Such was the idea of aesthetic creation among professors, lawyers, 
doctors; everywhere one admired the miracle of Irompe-l'oeil. Any minimally 
successful imitation would garner praise.'" Gisela Freund, "La Photographie dn 
point de vue sociologique" (Manuscript, p. 102). The quotation is from Jules 
Breton, /Vos peintres du siecle, p. 41. [15,1] 

Plush — the material in which traces are left especially easily. [15,2] 

Furthering the fashion in knickknacks are the advances in metallurgy, which has 
its origins in the First Empire. "During this period, groups of cupids and hacchan- 
tes appeared for the first time. . . . Today, art owns a shop and displays the mar- 
vels of its creations on shelves of gold or crystal, whereas in those days 
masterpieces of statuary, reduced in precise proportion, were sold at a discount. 
The Three Graces of Canova found a place in the houdoir, while the Bacchantes 
and the Faun of Pradier had the honors of the hridal chamber." Edouard Fou- 
caud, Paris inventeur: Physiologie de Vindustriefranqaise (Paris, 1844), pp. 196- 
197. [15,3] 

"The science of the poster . . . has attained that rare degree of perfection at which 
skill turns into art. And here I am not speaking of those extraordinary placards 
... on which experts in calligraphy . . . undertake to represent Napoleon on 
horsehack hy an ingenious combination of lines in which the course of his history 
is simultaneously narrated and depicted. No, I shall confine myself to ordinary 
posters. Just see how far these have heen able to push the eloquence of typo- 
graphy, the seductions of the vignette, the fascinations of color, hy using the most 
varied and brilliant of hues to lend perfidious support to the ruses of the publish- 



ers!" Victor Fournel, Ce qu'on voit dans les rues de Paris (Paris, 1858), pp. 293- 
294 ("Enseignes et af fiches"). [15,4] 



Interior of Alphonse Karr's apartment: "He lives like no one else. These days he's 
on the sixth or seventh floor above the Rue Vivienne. The Rue Vivienne for an 
artist! His apartment is hung in black; he has windowpanes of violet or white 
frosted glass. He has neither tables nor chairs (at most, a single chair for excep- 
tional visitors), and he sleeps on a divan — fully dressed, I'm told. He lives like a 
Turk, on cushions, and writes sitting on the fl oor. . . . His walls are decorated with 
various old things . . . ; Chinese vases, death-heads, fencer's foils, and tobacco 
pipes ornament every corner. For a servant, he has a mulatto whom he outfits in 
scarlet from head to toe." Jules Lecomte, Les Lettres de Van Engelgom, ed. Al- 
meras (Paris, 1925), pp. 63-64. [15,5] 

From Daumier's Croquis pris au Saion (Sketches Made at the Salon>. A solitary 
art-lover indicating a picture on which two miserable poplars are represented in a 
flat landscape: "What society could be as degenerate and corrupt as ours? . . . 
Everyone looks at pictures of more or less monstrous scenes, but no one stops 
before an image of beautiful and pure nature." [I5a,l] 

On the occasion of a murder case in London which turned on the discovery of a 
sack containing the victim's body parts, together with remnants of clothing; from 
the latter, the police were able to draw certain conclusions. '"So many things in a 
minuet!' a celebrated dancer used to say. So many things in an overcoat! — when 
circumstances and men make it speak. You will say it's a bit much to expect a 
person, each time he acquires a topcoat, to consider that one day it may serve him 
as a winding sheet. I admit that my suppositions are not exactly rose-colored. But, 
I repeat, . . . the week's events have been doleful." H. de Pene, Paris intime 



Furniture at the time of the Restoration: "sofas, divans, ottomans, love seats, 
recliners, settees." Jacques Robiquet, L'4rt et le gout sous la Restauration (Paris, 



"We have already said . . . that humanity is regressing to the state of cave dweller, 
and so on — but that it is regressing in an estranged, malignant form. The savage in 
his cave . . . feels ... at home there. . . . But the basement apartment of the poor 
man is a hostile dwelling, 'an alien, restraining power, which gives itself up to him 
only insofar as he gives up to it his blood and sweat. ' Such a dwelling can never feel 
like home, a place where he might at last exclaim, 'Here I am at home!' Instead, 
the poor man finds himself in someone else's home, . . . someone who daily lies in 
wait for him and throws him out if he does not pay his rent. He is also aware of the 
contrast in quality between his dwelling and a human dwelling — a residence in that 
other world, the heaven of wealth." Karl Marx, Der historische Materialismus, 



(Paris, 1859), p. 236. 



[I5a,2] 



1928), p. 202. 



[I5a,3] 



ed. Landshut and Mayer (Leipzig <1932>), vol. 1, p. 325 ("Nationalokonomie und 
Philosophic"). 1 ' 1 [I5a,4] 



Valery on Poe. He underlines the American writer's incomparable insight into the 
conditions and effects of literary work in general: "What distinguishes a truly 
general phenomenon is its fertility. ... It is therefore not surprising that Poe, 
possessing so effective and sure a method, became the inventor of several different 
literary forms — that he provided the first . . . examples of the scientific tale, the 
modern cosmogonic poem, the detective novel, the literature of morbid psycho- 
logical states." Valery, "Introduction" to Baudelaire, Les Fleurs du mal <Paris, 
1926>, p. xx. 15 [I5a,5] 

Iii the following description of a Parisian salon, Gautier gives drastic expression 
to the integration of the individual into the interior: "The eye, entranced, is led to 
the groups of ladies who, fluttering their fans, listen to the talkers half-reclining. 
Their eyes are sparkling like diamonds; their shoulders glisten like satin; and 
their lips open up like flowers." (Artificial things come forth!) Paris et les Parisiens 
mix XIX siecle (Paris, 1856), p. iv (Theophile Gautier, "Introduction"). [16,1] 

Balzac's interior decorating in the rather ill-fated property Les Jardies: 10 "This 
house . . . was one of the romances on which M. de Balzac worked hardest 
during his life, but he was never able to finish it. . . . 'On these patient walls,' as 
M. Gozlan has said, 'there were charcoal inscriptions to this effect: "Here a facing 
in Parian marble"; "Here a cedar stylobate"; "Here a ceiling painted by Eugene 
Delacroix"; "Here a fireplace in cipolin marble.'"" Alfred Nettement, Histoire de 
la litterature frangaise sous le gouvernement de juillet (Paris, 1859), vol. 2, pp. 266- 
267. [16,2] 

Development of "The Interior" chapter: entry of the prop into film. [16,3] 

E. R. Curtius cites the following passage from Balzac's Petits Bourgeois: "The 
hideous unbridled speculation that lowers, year by year, the height of the ceilings, 
that fits a whole apartment into the space formerly occupied by a drawing room 
and declares war on the garden, will not fail to have an influence on Parisian 
morals. Soon it will become necessaiy to live more outside the house than within 
it." Ernst Robert Curtius, Balzac (Bonn, 1923), p. 28. Increasing importance of 
the streets, for various reasons. [16,4] 

Perhaps there is a connection between the shrinking of residential space and the 
elaborate furnishing of the interior. Regarding the first, Balzac makes some telling 
observations: "Small pictures alone are in demand because large ones can no 
longer be hung. Soon it will be a formidable problem to house one's library. . . . 
One can no longer find space for provisions of any sort. Hence, one buys things 
that are not calculated to wear well. The shirts and the books won't last, so there 



you are. The durability of products is disappearing on all sides.'" Ernst Robert 
Curtius, Balzac (Bonn, 1923), pp. 28-29. [16,5] 



"Sunsets cast their glowing colors on the walls of dining room and drawing room, 
filtering softly through lovely hangings or intricate high windows with mullioned 
panes. All the furniture is immense, fantastic, strange, armed with locks and 
secrets like all civilized souls. Mirrors, metals, fabrics, pottery, and works of the 
goldsmith's art play a mute mysterious symphony for the eye." Charles Baude- 
laire, he Spleende Paris, ed. R. Simon (Paris), p. 27 ("L'Invitation au voyage"). 17 

[I6a,l] 

Etymology of the word "comfort." "In English, it used to mean consolation ('Com- 
forter' is the epithet applied to the Holy Spirit). Then the sense became, instead, 
ivell-being. Today, in all languages of the world, the word designates nothing more 
than rational convenience." Wladimir Weidle, Les Abeilles d'Aristee (Paris 
<1936>), p. 175 ("L'Agonie de Part"). [I6a,2] 

"The artist-midinettes ... no longer occupy rooms; rather, they live in studios. 
(More and more, you hear everyplace of habitation called a 'studio,' as if people 
were more and more becoming artists or students.)" Henri Polles, "L'Art du com- 
merce," Vendredi, February 12, 1937. [I6a,3] 

Multiplication of traces through the modem administrative apparatus. Balzac 
draws attention to this: "Do your utmost, hapless Frenchwomen, to remain 
unknown, to weave the very least little romance in the midst of a civilization 
which takes note, on public squares, of the hour when every hackney cab comes 
and goes; which counts every letter and stamps them twice, at the exact time they 
are posted and at the time they are delivered; which numbers the houses . . . ; 
which ere long will have every acre of land, down to the smallest holdings . . . , 
laid down on the broad sheets of a survey — a giant's task, by command of a 
giant." Balzac, Modeste Mignon, ]t cited in Regis Messac, Le "Detective Novel" <et 
I'injiuence de la pensee scientifique) (Paris, 1929), p. 461. [I6a,4] 

"Victor Hugo works standing up, and, since he cannot find a suitable antique to 
serve as his desk, he writes on a stack of stools and large books which is covered 
with a carpet. It is on the Bible, it is on the Nuremberg Chronicles, that the poet 
leans and spreads his paper." Louis Llhach, Les Contemporains (Paris, 1833), 
cited in Raymond Escholier, Victor Hugo raconte par ceux qui Vont vu (Paris, 
1931), p. 352. [17, 1] 

The Louis Philippe style: "The belly overspreads everything, even the time- 
pieces." [17,2] 



There is an apocalyptic interior — a complement, as it were, of the bourgeois 
interior at midcentury. It is to be found with Victor Hugo. He writes of spiritual- 



istic manifestations: "I have been checked for a moment in my miserable human 
amour-propre by actual revelation, coming to throw around my little miner's lamp 
a streak of lightning and of meteor." In Les Contemplations, he writes: 

We listen for any sounds in these dismal empty spaces; 
Wandering through the shadows, we listen to the breath 

That makes the darkness shudder; 
And now and then, lost in unfathomable nights, 
We see lit up by mighty lights 

The window of eternity. 

(Cited in Claudius Grillet, Victor Hugo spirite (Lyons and Paris, 1929>, pp. 52, 
22.) ' ' ' [17,3] 

Lodgings around 1860: "The apartment . . . was situated on the Rue d'Anjou. It 
was decorated . . . with carpets, door curtains, fringed valances, double draper- 
ies, so that you would think the Stone Age had been succeeded hy an Age of 
Hangings." Louise Weiss, Souvenirs cl'iuie enfance republicaine (Paris <1937>), 
p. 212. [17,4] 

The relation of the Jugendstil interior to its predecessors comes down to the fact 
that the bourgeois conceals bis alibi in history with a still more remote alibi in 
natural history (specifically in the realm of plants). [17,5] 

The etuis, dust covers, sheaths with which the bourgeois household of the pre- 
ceding century encased its utensils were so many measures taken to capture and 
preserve traces. [17,6] 

On the history of the domestic interior. The residential character of the rooms in 
the early factories, though disconcerting and inexpedient, adds this homely 
touch: that within these spaces one can imagine the factory owner as a quaint 
figurine in a landscape of machines, dreaming not only of his own but of their 
future greatness. With the dissociation of the proprietor from the workplace, this 
characteristic of factory buildings disappears. Capital alienates the employer, too, 
from his means of production, and the dream of their future greatness is finished. 
Tbis alienation process culminates in the emergence of the private home. 

[I7a,l] 

"During the first decades of the nineteenth century, furniture and the objects that 
surrounded us for use and pleasure were relatively simple and durable, and ac- 
corded with the needs of hoth the lower and the upper strata. This resulted in 
people's attachment, as they grew up, to the objects of their surroundings. . . . The 
differentiation of objects has broken down this situation in three different 
ways. . . . First, the sheer quantity of very specifically formed ohjects make a close 
. . . relationship to each of them more difficult. . . . This is expressed ... in the 
housewife's complaint that the care of the household becomes ceremonial fetish- 
ism. . . . This concurrent differentiation has the same effect as consecutive differ- 



entiation. Changes in fashion disrupt that . . . process of . . . assimilation between 
subject and object. . . . [In the third place, tbere is] the multitude of styles that 
confronts us when we view the objects that surround us." Georg Simmel, Philoso- 



On the theory of the trace. To "the Harbor-Master, . . . [as] a sort of . . . deputy- 
Neptune for the circumambient seas, ... I was, in common with the other sea- 
men of the port, merely a subject for official writing, filling up of forms with all 
the artificial superiority of a man of pen and ink to the men who grapple with 
realities outside the consecrated walls of official buildings. What ghosts we must 
have been to him! Mere symbols to juggle with in books and heavy registers, 
without brains and muscles and perplexities; something hardly useful and decid- 
edly inferior." Joseph Conrad, Die Schattenlinie (Berlin <1926>), p. 51. 20 (Compare 
with the Rousseau passage <cited belowx) [I7a,3] 

On the theory of the trace. Practice is eliminated from the productive process by 
machinery. In the process of administration, something analogous occurs with 
heightened organization. Knowledge of human nature, such as the senior em- 
ployee could acquire through practice, ceases to be decisive. This can be seen 
when one compares Conrad's observations in "The Shadow-Line" with a pas- 
sage from Les Confessions. [18,1] 

On the theory of the trace: administration in the eighteenth century. As secretary 
to the French embassy in Venice, Rousseau had abolished the tax on passports 
for the French. "As soon as the news got around that I had reformed the passport 
tax, my only applicants were crowds of pretended Frenchmen who claimed in 
abominable accents to be either from Provence, Picardy, or Burgundy. As I have 
a fairly good ear, I was not easily fooled, and I doubt whether a single Italian 
cheated me out of my sequin, or a single Frenchmen paid it." Jean Jacques Rous- 
seau, Les Confessions, ed. Hilsum (Paris < 1 9 3 1 >) , vol. 2, p. 137. 21 [18,2] 

Baudelaire, in the introduction to his translation of Poe's "Philosophy of Furni- 
ture," which originally appeared in Octoher 1852 in he Magasin des families: 
"Who among us, in his idle hours, has not taken a delicious pleasure in construct- 
ing for himself a model apartment, a dream house, a house of dreams?" Charles 
Baudelaire, Oeuvres completes, ed. Crepet, Histoires grotesques et serieuses par 



phiedes Geldes (Leipzig, 1900), pp. 491-494. 19 



[I7a,2] 



Poe (Paris, 1937), p. 304. 



[18,3] 