[Baudelaire] 



For it pleases me, all for your sake, to row 
My own oars here on my own sea, 
And to soar heavenward by a strange avenue, 
Singing you the unsung praises of Death. 

— Pieixe Ronsard, "Hymne de la Mort," A Louys dcs Masures 



"Baudelaire's problem . . . must have . . . posed itself in these terms: 'How to he a 
great poet, but neither a Lamartine nor a Hugo nor a Musset.' I do not say that 
these words were consciously formulated, but they must have heen latent in 
Baudelaire's mind; they even constituted what was the essential Baudelaire. They 
were his raison d'etat. . . . Baudelaire considered Victor Hugo; and it is not impos- 
sible to imagine what he thought of him. . . . Everything that might scandalize, and 
thereby instruct and guide a pitiless young observer in the way of his own future 
art, . . . Baudelaire must have recorded in his mind, distinguishing the admiration 
forced upon him by Hugo's wonderful gifts from the impurities, the impru- 
dences, . . . that is to say, the chances for life and fame that so great an artist left 
hehind him to he gleaned." Paul Valery, Introduction (Charles Baudelaire, Les 
Fleurs dumal, with an introduction by Paul Valery [Paris <1926>], pp. x, xii, xiv). 2 
Prohlem of the poncif. :i [ Jl , 1] 

"For a few years before the Revolution of 1848, everyone is hesitating between a 
pure art ani a social art, and it is only well after 1852 that I 'art pour Vart gains the 
upper hand." C. L. de Liefde, Le Saint-Simonisme dans la poesie franqaise entre 



Leconte de Lisle, in the preface to his Poemes et poesies of 1855: "The hymns and 
odes inspired by steam power and electric telegraphy leave me cold." Cited in 
C. L. de Liefde, Le Saint-Simonisme dans la poesie franqaise entre 1825 et 1865, 



1825 et 1865 (Haarlem, 1927>, p. 180. 



[J1.2] 



p. 179. 



[J1.3] 



Baudelaire's "Les Bonnes Soeurs" <The Kind Sisters> may be compared with the 
Saint-Simonian poem "La Rue" <The Street), by Savinien Lapointe, shoemaker. 



Charles Baudelaire, 1855. Photo by Nadar. Musee d'Orsay, Paris; photo copyright 
© RMN. 



The latter is concerned only with prostitution and, at the end, evokes memories 
the youth of the fallen young women: 

Oh! Do not seek to know all that debauchery does 

To wither the flowers and mow them down; 

In its working, it is premature as death 

And will make you old despite your eighteen years. 



Have pity on them! Pity! 

When on the corner you should knock against them, 
Their angelic f aces bathed in the glow of good recalled. 

Olinde Rodrigues, Poesies sociales des ouvriers (Paris, 1841), pp. 201, 203. 

[J1.4] 

Dates. Baudelaire's first letter to Wagner: February 17, 1 860. Wagner's concerts 
in Paris: February 1 and 8, 1860. Paris premiere of Tannhmuser: March 13, 1861. 
When was Baudelaire's article in La Revue europeenne? 4 [ Jl,5] 

Baudelaire planned "an enormous work on the peintres des moeurs (painters of 
manners)." Crepet, in this connection, cites his statement: "Images — my great, my 
primitive passion." 5 Jacques Crepet, "Miettes baudelairiennes," Mercure de 
France, 46th year, vol. 262, no. 894, pp. 531-532. [ Jl,6] 

"Baudelaire . . .can still write, in 1852, in the preface to Dupont's Chansons: 'Art 
was thereafter inseparable from morality and utility. ' And he speaks there of the 
'puerile Utopia of the school of art for art's safce.' 6 . . . Nevertheless, he changes 
his mind soon after 1852. This conception of social art may perhaps be explained 
by his youthful relations. Dupont was his friend at the moment when Baudelaire, 
'almost fanatically republican under the monarchy,' was meditating a realistic 
and communicatory poetry." C. L. de Liefde, he Saint-Simonisme dans la poesie 
franqaise entre 1825 et 1865 <Haarlem, 1927>, p. 115. [Jla,l] 

Baudelaire soon forgot the February Revolution. 7 Telling evidence of this fact has 
heen published hy Jacques Crepet, in "Miettes baudelairiennes" <Baudelairean 
Morsels) (Mercure de France, vol. 262, no. 894, p. 525), in the form of a review of 
the Histoire de Neuilly et de ses chateaux, by the abbe Bellanger, a review which 
Baudelaire probably composed at the recfuest of his friend the lawyer Ancelle, and 
which at the time presumably appeared in the press. There Baudelaire speaks of 
the history of the place "from Roman times to the terrible days of February, when 
the chateau was the theater and spoil of the most ignoble passions, of orgy and 
destruction." [Jla,2] 

Nadar describes the outfi t worn by Baudelaire, who is encountered in the vicinity 
of his residence <of 1843-1845), the Hotel Pimodan. "Black trousers drawn well 
above his polished hoots; a hlue workman's blouse, stiff in its new folds; his hlack 
hair, naturally curly, worn long — his only coiffure; bright linen, strictly without 
starch; a faint moustache under his nose and a bit of beard on his chin; rose-col- 
ored gloves, quite new. . . . Thus arrayed and hatless, Baudelaire walked ahout 
his quartier of the city at an uneven pace, hoth nervous and languid, like a cat, 
choosing each stone of the pavement as if he had to avoid crushing an egg." Cited 
in Firmin Maillard, La Cite des intellectueh (Paris <1905>), p. 362. [ Jla,3] 



Baudelaire — after his enforced sea voyage 8 — was a well-traveled man. [Jla,4] 



Baudelaire to Poulet-Malassis, on January 8, 1860, after a visit from Meryon: 
"After he left me, I wondered how it was that I, who have always had the mind and 
the nerves to go mad, have never actually gone mad. In all seriousness, I gave 
heaven a Pharisee's thanks for this." 9 Cited in Gustave Geffroy, Charles Meryon 
(Paris, 1926), p. 128. [ J la, 5] 

From the <eighth> section of Baudelaire's "Salon de 1859." There one fi nds, apro- 
pos of Meryon, this phrase: "the profound and complex charm of a capital city 
which has grown old and worn in the glories and tribulations of life." A little 
further on: "I have rarely seen the natural solemnity of an immense city more 
poetically reproduced. Those majestic accumulations of stone; those spires 'whose 
fingers point to heaven'; those obelisks of industry, spewing forth their conglom- 
erations of smoke against the firmament; those prodigies of scaffolding 'round 
buildings under repair, applying their openwork architecture, so paradoxically 
beautiful, upon architecture's solid body; that tumultuous sky, charged with an- 
ger and spite; those limitless perspectives, only increased by the thought of all the 
drama they contain; — he forgot not one of the complex elements which go to make 
up the painful and glorious decor of civiJization. . . . But a cruel demon has 
touched M. Meryon's brain. . . . And from that moment we have never ceased 
waiting anxiously for some consoling news of this singular naval officer who in one 
short day turned into a mighty artist, and who bade farewell to the ocean's solemn 
adventures in order to paint the gloomy majesty of this most disquieting of capi- 
tals." 10 Cited in Gustave Geffroy, Charles Meryon (Paris, 1926), pp. 125-126. 

[J2,H 

The editor Delatre conceived a plan to publish an album of Meryon's etchings with 
text by Baudelaire. The plan fell through; but it had already been ruined for 
Baudelaire when Meryon demanded, instead of a text suited to the poet, a pedan- 
tic explication of the pictured monuments. Baudelaire complains of the matter in 
his letter of February 16, 1860, to Poulet-Malassis. [J2,2] 

Meryon placed these lines under his etching Le Pont-ISeuf: 

Here lies the exact likeness 
Of the late Pont-Neuf, 
All newly refurbished 
Per recent ordinance. 
O learned doctors, 
Skillful surgeons, 
Why not do for us 

What's been done f or this stone bridge? 

According to Geffroy — who evidently takes them from another version of the etch- 
ing — the last two lines are: "Will tell why renovations / Have been forced on this 
stone bridge." Gustave Geffroy, Charles Meryon (Paris, 1926), p. 59. [J2,3] 



The Pont-Neuf. Etching by Charles Meryon, 1853-1854. SeeJ2,3. 



Bizarre features on plates hy Meryon. "The Rue cles Chantres": squarely in the 
foreground, affixed at eye-level on the wall of what would seem to be a nearly 
windowless house, is a poster hearing the words "Sea Baths." <See Geffroy, Char- 
les Meryon, p. 144. > — "The College Henry IV," about which Geffroy writes: "All 
around the school, the gardens, and neighboring houses, the space is empty, and 
suddenly Meryon hegins to fill it with a landscape of mountain and sea, replacing 
the ocean of Paris . The sails and masts of a ship appear, some flocks of sea birds 
are taking wing, and this phantasmagoria gathers around the most rigorous de- 
sign, the tall buildings of the school regularly pierced by windows, the courtyard 
planted with trees, . . . and the surrounding houses, with their dark rooftops, 
crowded chimneys, and blank facades" (Geffroy, Charles Meryon, p. 151). — "The 
Admiralty": in the clouds a troop of horses, chariots, and dolphins advances upon 
the ministry, ships and sea serpents are not lacking, and several human-shaped 
creatures are to he seen in the multitude. "This will be . . . the last view of Paris 
engraved hy Meryon. He bids adieu to the city where he suffered that onslaught of 
dreams at the house, stern as a fortress, in which he did service as a young ensign, 
in the springtime of his life, when he was just setting out for the distant isles" 
(Geffroy, Charles Meryon, p. 161). 0 Flaneur D [J2a,l] 

"Meryon 's execution is incomparable, Beraldi says. The most striking thing is the 
beauty and dignity of his firm, decisive line. Those line straight edges are said to be 



executed thus: the plate is set upright on an easel, the etching needle is held at 
arm's length (like a rapier), and the hand moves slowly from top to bottom." 
R. Castinelli, "Charles Meryon," Introduction to Charles Meryon, Eaux-fortes 
sur Paris, p. iii. [J2a,2] 

Meryon produced his twenty-two etchings of Paris between 1852 and 1854. 

tJ2a,3] 

When did the "Paris article" <article de Paris > first appear? [J2a,4] 

What Baudelaire says about a drawing by Daumier on the subject of cholera 
could also apply to certain engravings by Meryon: "True to its ironic custom in 
times of great calamity and political upheaval, the sky of Paris is superb; it is 
quite white and incandescent with heat." Charles Baudelaire, Les Dessins de 
Daumier (Paris <1924>), p. 13. <SeeJ52a,4.> D Dust, Boredom D [J2a,5] 

"The splenetic cupola of the sky" — a phrase from Charles Baudelaire, he Spleen 
de Paris, ed. Simon (Paris), p. 8 ("Chacun sa chimere"). 11 [J2a,6] 

"The philosophical and literary Catholicism ... of Baudelaire had need of an 
intermediate position . . . where it could take up its abode between God and the 
Devil. The title Les Limbes <Limbo> marked this geographic determination of 
Baudelaire's poems, making it possible to understand better the order Baudelaire 
wanted to establish among them, which is the order of a journey — more exactly, a 
fourth journey after Dante's three journeys in Inferno, Purgatorio, and Paradiso. 
The poet of Florence lived on in the poet of Paris." Albert Thibaudet, Histoire de 
la litteraturef rancaise de 1789 a nos jours (Paris <1936>), p. 325. 12 [ J3,l] 

On the allegorical element. "Dickens . . . mentions, among the coffee shops into 
which he crept in those wretched days, one in St. Martin's Lane, 'of which I only 
recollect that it stood near the church, and that in the door there was an oval glass 
plate with coffee room painted on it, addressed towards the street. If I ever find 
myself in a very different kind of coffee room now, but where there is such an 
inscription on glass, and read it backwards on the wrong side, MOOR eeffoc (as I 
often used to do then in a dismal reverie), a shock goes through my blood.' That 
wild word, 'Moor Eeffoc,' is the motto of all effective realism." G. K. Chesterton, 
Dickens (series entitled Vie des hommes illustres, no. 9), trans, from the English by 
Laurent and Martin-Dupont (Paris, 1927), p. 32. 13 [J3,2] 

Dickens and stenography: "He describes how, after he had learnt the whole exact 
alphabet, 'there then appeared a procession of new horrors, called arbitrary 
characters — the most despotic characters I have ever known; who insisted, for 
instance, that a thing like the beginning of a cobweb meant "expectation ," and that 
a pen-and-ink skyrocket stood for "disadvantageous."' He concludes, Tt was al- 
most hearthreaking.' But it is significant that somebody else, a colleague of his, 



concluded, 'There never ivas such a shorthand writer.'" G. K. Chesterton, Dick- 
ens (series entitled Vie des hommes illustres, no. 9), trans. Laurent and Martin- 
Dupont (Paris, 1927), pp. 40-41. 14 [J3,3] 



Valery (Introduction to Les Fleurs du mal [Paris, 1926], p. xxv) speaks of a com- 
bination of "eternity and intimacy" in Baudelaire. 13 [J3>4] 

From the article by Barbey d'Aurevilly in Articles justicatifs pour Charles Baude- 
laire, auteur des Fleurs du mal (Paris, 1857), a hooklet of thirty-three pages, with 
other contributions by Dulamon, Asselineau, and Thierry, which was printed at 
Baudelaire's expense for the trial: lf ' "The poet, terrifying and terrified, wanted us 
to inhale the abomination of that dread basket that he carries, pale canephore, on 
his head bristling with horror. . . . His talent ... is itself a flower of evil cultivated 
in the hothouses of Decadence. . . . There is something of Dante in the author of 
Les Fleurs du mal, but it is the Dante of an epoch in decline, an atheist and 
modernist Dante, a Dante come after Voltaire." Cited in W. T. Bandy, Baudelaire 
Judged by His Contemporaries (New York <1933>), pp. 167-168 <collection of 
texts in French) . [ J3a,l] 

Gautier's note on Baudelaire in Les Poetesfrancais: Recueil des chefs-d'oeuvre de 
la poesiefranqaise, eel. Eugene Crepet (Paris, 1862), vol. 4, Les Contemporains: 
"We never read Les Fleurs du mal . . . without thinking involuntarily of that tale 
by Hawthorne <entitled "Rappaccini's Daughter"). . . . His muse resembles the 
doctor's daughter whom no poison can harm, but whose pallid and anemic complex- 
ion betrays the influence of the milieu she inhabits." Cited in W. T. Bandy, Baude- 
laire Judged by His Contemporaries (New York), p. 174. <See J29a,3> . [J3a,2] 

Main themes of Poe's aesthetic, according to Valery: philosophy of composition, 
theory of the artificial, theory of modernity, theory of the strange and exceptional. 

[J3a,3] 

"Thus, Baudelaire's problem might have — indeed, must have — posed itself in 
these terms: 'How to he a great poet, but neither a Lamartine nor a Hugo nor a 
Musset.' I do not say that these words were consciously formulated, but they must 
have been latent in Baudelaire's mind; they even constituted what was the essen- 
tial Baudelaire. They were his raison d'etat. In the domain of creation, which is 
also the domain of pride, the need to come out and be distinct is part of life itself." 
Paul Valery, Introduction to Baudelaire, Les Fleurs du mal (Paris, 1928), p. x. 17 

[J3a,4] 

Regis Messac (<Le '"Detective Novel" et V influence de la pensee scientifique [Paris, 
1929], > p. 421) points to the influence of the "Two Crepuscules" <"Le Crepuscule 
du matin" and "Le Crepuscule du soir," in Les Fleurs du mal>, first published 
February 1, 1852, in La Semaine thedtrale, on certain passages in Ponson du 
Terrail's Drames de Paris, which hegan to appear, in installments, in 1857. 

[J3a,5] 



The title originally planned for Spleen de Paris was he Promeneur solitaire. For 
he Fleurs du mal it was Les Limbes <Limbo>. [ J4,l] 



From "Conseils aux jeunes litterateurs": "If one is willing to live in stuhborn 
contemplation of tomorrow's work, daily perseverance will serve inspiration." 
Charles Baudelaire, L'Art romantique, ed. Hachette, vol. 3 (Paris), p. 286.'" 

[J4.2] 

Baudelaire confesses to having had, "in childhood, the good fortune — or the mis- 
fortune — of reading only books for adults." Charles Baudelaire, L'Art roman- 
tique (Paris), p. 298 ("Drames et romans honnetes"). 19 [J4,3] 

On Heine: "<his> works are corrupted by materialistic sentimentality." Baude- 
laire, L'Art rommntique, p. 303 ("L'Ecole paienne"). 20 [J4,4] 

A motif that wandered from Spleen de Paris to "L'Ecole paienne": "Why don't the 
poor wear gloves when they heg? They would make a fortune." Baudelaire, LArt 
romantique (Paris), p. 309. 21 [J4,5] 

"The time is notf ar off when it will he understood that every literature that refuses 
to walk hand in hand with science and philosophy is a homicidal and suicidal 
literature." Baudelaire, L'Art romantique (Paris), p. 309 (concluding sentence of 
"L'Ecole paienne"). 22 [J4.6] 

Baudelaire on the child raised in the company of the Pagan School: "His soul, 
constantly excited and unappeased, goes ahout the world, the busy, toiling world; 
it goes, I say, like a prostitute, crying: Plastique! Plastique! The plastic — that 
frightful word gives me goose flesh." Baudelaire, L'Art romantique (Paris), 
p. 307. 21 Compare J22a,2. [J4,7] 

A passage from the portrait of Victor Hugo in which Baudelaire, like an engraver 
who sketches his own image in a remarque, has portrayed himself in a subordi- 
nate clause: "If he paints the sea, no seascape will equal his. The ships which 
furrow its surface or which cut through its foam will have, more than those of 
any other painter, the appearance of fierce combatants, the character of will and 
of animality which mysteriously emerges from a geometric and mechanical appa- 
ratus of wood, iron, ropes, and canvas; a monstrous animal created by man to 
which the wind and the waves add the beauty of movement." Baudelaire, L'Art 
romantique (Paris), p. 321 ("Victor Hugo"). 2 * [J4,8] 

A phrase apropos of Auguste Barbier: "the natural indolence of those who depend 
on inspiration." Baudelaire, L'Art romantique (Paris), p. 335. 25 [J4a,l] 

Baudelaire describes the poetry of the lyric poet — in the essay on Banville — in a 
way that, point for point, brings into view the exact opposite of his own poetry: 
"The word 'apotheosis' is one of those that unfailingly appear under the pen of 



the poet when he has to describe ... a mingling of glory and light. And if the lyric 
poet has occasion to speak of himself, he will not depict himself bent over a 
table, . . . wrestling with intractable phrases, . . . any more than he will show 
himself in a poor, wretched, or disorderly room; nor, if he wishes to appear dead, 
will he show himself rotting heneath a linen shroud in a wooden casket. That 
would be lying." Baudelaire, L'Art romantique (Paris), pp. 370-371. 26 [J4a,2] 

In his essay on Banville, Baudelaire mentions mythology together with allegory, 
and then continues: "Mythology is a dictionary of living hieroglyphics." Baude- 
laire, L'Art romantique (Paris), p. 370. 27 [J4a,3] 

Conjunction of the modern and the demonic: "Modern poetry is related at one 
and the same time to painting, music, sculpture, decorative art, satiric philosophy, 
and the analytic spirit. . . . Some could perhaps see in this symptoms of depravity 
of taste. But that is a question which I do not wish to discuss here." Nevertheless, 
a page later, after a reference to Beethoven, Maturin, Byron, and Poe, one reads: 
"I mean that modern art has an essentially demoniacal tendency. And it seems 
that this satanic side of man . . . increases every day, as if the devil, like one who 
fattens geese, enjoyed enlarging it by artificial means, patiently force-feeding the 
human race in his poultry yard in order to prepare himself a more succulent 
dish." Baudelaire, L'Art romantique (Paris), pp. 373-374. 28 The concept of the 
demonic comes into play where the concept of modernity converges with 
Catholicism. [J4a,4] 

Regarding Leconte de Lisle: "My natural predilection for Rome prevents me 
from feeling all the enjoyment that I should in the reading of bis Greek poems." 
Baudelaire, L'Art romantique (Paris), pp. 389-390. 29 Chthonic view of the world. 
Catholicism. [J4a,5] 

It is very important that the modern, with Baudelaire, appear not only as the 
signature of an epoch but as an energy by which this epoch immediately trans- 
forms and appropriates antiquity. Among all the relations into which modernity 
enters, its relation to antiquity is critical. Thus, Baudelaire sees confirmed in 
Hugo "the fatality which led him . . . partially to transform ancient ode and 
ancient tragedy into the poems and dramas that we know." Baudelaire, LArt 
romantique (Paris), p. 401 ("Les Miser able s"), m This is also, for Baudelaire, the 
function of Wagner. [ J 5 , 1 ] 

The gesture with which the angel chastises the miscreant: "Is it not useful for the 
poet, the philosopher, to take egoistic Happiness by the hair from time to time and 
say to it, while ruhhing its nose in blood and dung: 'See your handiwork and 
swallow it'?" Charles Baudelaire, L'Art romantique (Paris), p. 406 ("Les 
Miser ables")* ! [J5,2] 



"The Church, . . . that Pharmacy where no one has the right to slumber!" Baude- 
laire, L'Art romantique (Paris), p. 420 ("Madame Bovary")J 12 [J5,3] 



"Madame Bovary, in what is most forceful, most ambitious, and also most contem- w 
plative in her nature, has remained a man. Just as Pallas Athena sprang fully 
armed from the head of Zeus, so this strange androgynous creature has kept all the ^ 
attraction of a virile soul in a charming feminine body." Further along, on W 
Flaubert: "All intellectual women will be grateful to him for having raised the a. 
female to so high a level . . . and for having made her share in that combination of gi. 
calculation and reverie which constitutes the perfect being." Baudelaire, L'Art 
romantique, pp. 415, 419. 33 [J5,4] 



"Hysteria! Why couldn't this physiological mystery be made the sum and sub- 
stance of a literary work — this mystery which the Academie de Medecine has not 
yet solved and which, manifesting itself in women by the sensation of a lump in the 
throat that seems to rise . . . , shows itself in excitable men by every kind of impo- 
tence as well as hy a tendency toward every kind of excess." Baudelaire, L'Art 
romantique (Paris), p. 418 ("Madame Bovary" J. 34 [J5,5] 



From "Pierre Dupont": "Whatever the party to which one belongs, . . . it is impos- 
sible not to be moved by the sight of that sickly throng breathing the dust of the 
workshops, . . . sleeping among vermin . . . — that sighing and languishing throng 
. . . which looks long and sadly at the sunshine and shadows of the great parks." 
Baudelaire, L'Art romantique (Paris), pp. 198-199. 35 [J5a,l] 



From "Pierre Dupont": "By excluding morality, and often even passion, the puer- 
ile Utopia of the school of art for art's sake was inevitably sterile. . . . When there 
appeared a poet, awkward at times, hut almost always great, who proclaimed in 
impassioned language the sacredness of the Revolution of 1830 and sang of the 
destitution of England and Ireland, despite his defective rhymes, despite his pleo- 
nasms, . . . the question was settled, and art was thereafter inseparable from mo- 
rality and utility." Baudelaire, L'Art romantique (Paris), p. 193. 3f ' The passage 
refers to Barbier. [J5a,2] 



"The optimism of Dupont, his unlimited trust in the natural goodness of man, his 
fanatical love of nature constitute the greatest share of his talent." Baudelaire, 
L'Art romantique (Paris), p. 201. 37 [J5a,3] 



"I was not at all surprised to find ... in Tannhiiuser, Lohengrin, and The Flying 
Dutchman, an excellent method of construction, a spirit of order and division that 
recalls the architecture of ancient tragedies." Baudelaire, L'Art romantique 
(Paris), p. 225 ("Richard Wagner et Tannhauser")™ [J5a,4] 



"If, in his choice of subjects and in his dramatic method, Wagner resembles antiq- 
uity, by the passionate energy of his expression he is today the truest repre- 
sentative of modern nature." Baudelaire, L'Art romantique (Paris), p. 250. :w 

[J5a,5] 



Baudelaire in "L'Art philosophique," an essay concerned mainly with Alfred Re- 
thel: "Here everything — place, decor, furnishings, accessories (see Hogarth, for 
example) — everything is allegory, allusion, hieroglyph, rebus." Baudelaire, L'Art 
romantique, p. 131. 10 There follows a reference to Michelet's interpretation of 
Diirer's Melancholia I. [J5a,6] 

Variant of the passage on Meryon cited by Gef'froy, in "Peintres et aqua-fortistes" 
(1862): "Just the other day a young American artist, M. Whistler, was showing . . . 
a set of etchings . . . representing the banks of the Thames; wonderful tangles of 
rigging, yardarms and rope; farragos of fog, furnaces, and corkscrews of smoke; 
the profound and intricate poetry of a vast capital. . . . M. Meryon, the true type 
of the consummate etcher, could not neglect the call. ... In the pungency, fi nesse, 
and sureness of his drawing, M. Meryon recalls all that was best in the old etchers. 
We have rarely seen the natural solemnity of a great capital more poetically de- 
picted. Those majestic accumulations of stone; those 'spires whose fingers point to 
heaven' ; those obelisks of industry, spewing forth their conglomerations of smoke 
against the firmament; those prodigies of scaffolding 'round buildings under re- 
pair, applying their openwork architecture, of such paradoxical and arachnean 
beauty, upon architecture's solid hody; that foggy sky, charged with anger and 
spite; those limitless perspectives, only increased by the thought of the dramas 
they contain — he forgot not one of the complex elements which go to make up the 
painful and glorious decor of civilization." Baudelaire, L'Art romantique (Paris), 
pp. 119-121." [ J6,l] 

On Guys: "The festivals of the Bairam, ... in the midst of which, like a pale sun, 
can he discerned the endless ennui of the late sultan." Baudelaire, L'Art roman- 
tique (Paris), p. 83. 42 [J6,2] 

On Guys: "Wherever those deep, impetuous desires, war, love, and gaming, are in 
full fl ood, like Orinocos of the human heart . . . , our observer is always punctu- 
ally on the spot." Baudelaire, L'Art romantique (Paris), p. 87. 4:! [ J6,3] 

Baudelaire as antipode of Rousseau, in the maxim from his essay on Guys: "For 
no sooner do we take leave of the domain of needs and necessities to enter that of 
pleasures and luxury than we see that nature can counsel nothing but crime. It is 
this infallible Mother Nature who has created parricide and cannibalism." Baude- 
laire, L'Art romantique (Paris), p. 100."' [JM] 

"Very difficult to note down in shorthand" — this, from the essay on Guys, is 
Baudelaire's appreciation, obviously very modern, of the movement of carriages. 
Baudelaire, L'Art romantique (Paris), p. 1 13. 45 [ J6,5] 

Closing sentences of the Guys essay: "He has gone everywhere in quest of the 
ephemeral, the fleeting forms of beauty in the life of our day, the characteristic 
traits of what, with the reader's permission, we have called 'modernity.' Often 
bizarre, violent, excessive, but always full of poetry, he has succeeded, in his 



drawings, in distilling the bitter or heady flavor of the wine of Life." Baudelaire, 
L'Art romantique (Paris), p. 114. 44 [J6a,l] 



The figure of the "modern" and that of "allegory" must he brought into relation 
with each other: "Woe unto him who seeks in antiquity anything other than pure 
art, logic, and general method! By plunging too deeply into the past, ... he 
renounces the . . . privileges provided by circumstances; for almost all our origi- 
nality comes from the stamp that time imprints upon our feelings <sensations>!' 
Baudelaire, L'Art romantique (Paris), p. 72 ("Le Peintre de la vie moderne"). 47 But 
the privilege of which Baudelaire speaks also comes into force, in a mediated way, 
vis-a-vis antiquity: the stamp of time that imprints itself on antiquity presses out 
of it the allegorical configuration. [ J6a,2] 



Concerning "Spleen et ideal," these reflections from the Guys essay: "Modernity is 
the transitory, the fugitive, the contingent; it is one half of art, the other half being 
the eternal and immutable. ... If any particular modernity is to be worthy of 
becoming antiquity, one must extract from it the mysterious beauty that human 
life involuntarily gives it. It is to this task that Monsieur G. particularly addresses 
himself." Baudelaire, L'Art romantique (Paris), p. 70. In another place (p. 74), he 
speaks of "this legendary translation of external life."' 18 [J6a,3] 



Motifs of the poems in the theoretical prose. "Le Coucher du soleil romantique" 
(Romantic Sunset>: "Dandyism is a sunset; like the declining daystar, it is glori- 
ous, without heat and full of melancholy. But alas, the rising tide of democracy . . . 
is daily overwhelming these last representatives of human pride" (L 'Art roman- 
tique, p. 95). — "Le Soleil" <The Sun>: "At a time when others are asleep, Monsieur 
G. is bending over his tahle, darting onto a sheet of paper the same glance that a 
moment ago he was directing toward external things, skirmishing with his pencil, 
his pen, his hrush, splashing his glass of water up to the ceiling, wiping his pen on 
his shirt, in a ferment of violent activity, as though afraid that the images might 
escape him, cantankerous though alone, elbowing himself on" (L'Art romantique, 
p. 67) * [J6a,4] 

Nouveaute: "The child sees everything in a state of newness; he is always drunk. 
Nothing more resembles what we call inspiration than the delight with which a 
child absorbs form and color. ... It is by this deep and joyful curiosity that we 
may explain the fixed and animally ecstatic gaze of a child confronted wkh 
something new." Baudelaire, L'Art romantique (Paris), p. 62 ("Le Peintre de la vie 
moderne"). Perhaps this explains the dark saying in "L'Oeuvre et la vie d'Eugene 
Delacroix": "For it is true to say that, generally speaking, the child, in relation to 
the man, is much closer to original sin" (L'Art romantique, p. 41). 50 [ J7,l] 



The sun: "the boisterous sun heating a tattoo upon his windowpane" (L'Art ro- 
mantique, p. 65); "the landscapes of the great city . . . huf feted by the sun" (L'Art 
romantique, pp. 65-66). ;>l []7 ',2] 



In "L'Oeuvre et la vie d'Eugene Delacroix": "The whole visible universe is but a 
storehouse of images and signs." Baudelaire, L'Art romantique, p. 13. 02 [J7,3] 



From the Guys essay: "Beauty is made up of an eternal, invariable element . . . 
and of a relative, circumstantial element, which will be . . . the age — its fashions, 
its morals, its emotions. Without this second element, which might be described as 
the amusing, enticing, appetizing icing on the divine cake, the first element would 
be beyond our powers of digestion." Baudelaire, L'Art romantique, pp. 54-55. 5:i 

IF A] 

On nouveaute: "Night! you'd please me more without these stars / which speak a 
language I know all too well." Flews <du mal>, ed. Payot, p. 139 ("Obsession"). 0 ' 1 

[J7,5] 

The subsequent appearance of the flower injugendstil is not without significance 
for the title Les Flews du mcd. This work spans the arch that reaches from the 
taedium vitae of the Romans tojugendstil. [J7,6] 

It would be important to determine Poe's relation to Latinity. Baudelaire's inter- 
est in the technique of composition could have led him — in the end — as surely to 
Latin culture as his interest in the artificial led him to Anglo-Saxon culture. 
W>rking through Poe, tliis latter area of culture also conditions — at the outset — 
Baudelaire's theory of composition. Hence, it becomes more urgent to ask 
whether this doctrine does not, in the end, bear a Latin stamp. [J7,7] 

The Lesbians — a painting by Courbet. [J 7,8] 

Nature, according to Baudelaire, knows this one luxury: crime. Thus the sig- 
nificance of the artificial. Perhaps we may draw on this thought for the interpreta- 
tion of the idea that children stand nearest to original sin. Is it because, exuberant 
by nature, they oumot get out of harm's way? At bottom, Baudelaire is thinking 
of parricide. (Compare L'Art romantique [Paris], p. 100.) 55 [J7a.l] 

The key to the emancipation from antiquity — which (see in the Guys essay, L'Art 
romantique, p. 72) M can furnish only the canon of composition — is for Baudelaire 
allegorese. [J7a,2] 

Baudelaire's manner of reciting. He gathered his friends — Antonio Watripon, 
Gabriel Dantrague, Malassis, Delvau — "in a modest cafe on the Rue Dau- 
phine. . . . The poet began by ordering punch; then, when he saw us all disposed 
toward benevolence . . . , he would recite to us in a voice at once mincing, soft, 
fluty, oily, and yet mordant, some enormity or other — "Le Vin de l'assassin" <The 
Murderer's Wine> or "Une Charogne" <Carrion>. The contrast between the vio- 
lence of the images and the perfect placidity, the suave and emphatic accentuation, 



of the delivery was truly striking." Jules Levallois, Milieu de siecle: Memoires d'un 
critique (Paris <1895>), pp. 93-94. [J7a,3] 



"The famous phrase, 'I who am the son of a priest'; the glee he was said to feel in 
eating nuts, when he would imagine he was munching the brains of small children; 
the story of the glazier who, at liis request, climbed six flights of stairs under a 
heavy load of windowpanes in oppressive summer heat, only to be told he was not 
needed — all just so many insanities, and probably falsehoods, which he delighted 
in amassing." Jules Levallois, Milieu de siecle: Memoires d'un critique (Paris), 



A remarkable pronouncement by Baudelaire on Gautier (cited in Jules Levallois, 
Milieu de siecle: Memoires d'un critique [Paris], p. 97). It is recorded by Charles 
de Lovenjoul, "Un Dernier Chapitre de l'histoire des oeuvres de Balzac," in 
L'Echo des theatres of August 25, 1846, as follows: "Fat, lazy, sluggish, he has no 
ideas, and can only string words together as the Osage strings beads for a neck- 



Highly significant letter from Baudelaire to Toussenel: "Monday, January 21, 
1856. My dear Toussenel, I really want to thank you for your gift. I didn't know 
the value of your book — I admit it simply and baldly. . . . For a long time I've been 
rejecting almost all books with a feeling of disgust. It's been a long time, too, since 
I've read anything so absolutely instructive and amusing. The chapter on the 
falcon and the birds that hunt on man's behalf is a masterpiece in itself. / There 
are expressions in your book that recall those of the great masters and which are 
cries of truth — expressions whose tone is irresistibly philosophical, such as, 
'Every animal is a sphinx,' and, with regard to analogy, 'What repose the mind 
finds in gentle quietude, sheltered by so fertile and so simple a doctrine, for which 
none of God's works is a mystery!' . . . What is beyond doubt is that you are a 
poet. I've been saying for a very long time that the poet is supremely intelligent . . . 
and that imagination is the most scientific of faculties, for it alone can understand 
the universal analogy, or what a mystic religion calls correspondence. But when I 
try to publish such statements, I'm told I'm mad. . . . What is absolutely certain is 
that I have a philosophical cast of mind that allows me to see clearly what is true, 
even in zoology, although I'm neither a huntsman nor a naturalist. . . . One idea 
has been uppermost in my thoughts since I started reading your book — and this is 
that you're a true intelligence which has wandered into a sect. All things consid- 
ered, what do you owe to Fourier? Nothing, or very little. Without Fourier you 
would still be what you are. Rational men didn't await Fourier's arrival on earth 
to realize that nature is a language, an allegory, a mold, an embossing, if you 
like. . . . Your book arouses in me a great many dormant thoughts — and where 
original sin is concerned, as well as . . .form molded on an idea, I've often thought 
that noxious, disgusting animals were, perhaps, merely the coming to life in hodily 
form of man's evil thoughts. . . . Thus, the whole of nature participates in original 
sin. / Don't hold my boldness and straightforwardness against me, hut believe 



pp. 94-95. 



[J7a,4] 



lace." <See J36a,l.> 



[J7a,5] 



TheopbileGautier, 1854-1855. Photo by Nadar. Musee d'Orsay, 
Paris; photo copyright © RMN. SeeJ7a,5. 

that I am your devoted . . . Ch. Baudelaire.""' 7 Henri Cordier, Notules sur Baude- 
laire (Paris, 1900), pp. 5-7. The middle section of the letter polemicizes against 
Toussenel's faith in progress and liis denunciation of de Maistre. [ J8] 

"Origin of the name Baudelaire. Here is what M. Georges Barral has written on 
this subject in the La Revue des curiosites revolutionnaires: Baudelaire explained 
the etymology of his name, which, he said, came not from bel or beau hut from 
band or bald. 'My name is something terrible,' he declared. 'As a matter of fact, 
the badelaire was a saher with a short, broad blade and a convex cutting edge, 
hooked at the tip. ... It was introduced into France after the Crusades and used 
in Paris until around 1560 for executing criminals. Some years ago, in 1861, dur- 
ing excavations carried out near the Pont-au-Change, they recovered the bade- 
laire used by the executioner at the Grand Chatelet in the twelfth century. It was 
deposited in the Musee de Cluny. Go and have a look. It is frightening to see. I 
shudder to think how the profile of my face approximates the profile of this bade- 



/••lire.' — 'Bnt your name is Baudelaire,' I replied, 'not B&delaireJ' — 'Badelaire, 
Baudelaire by corruption. It's the same thing.' — 'Not at all,' I say. 'Your name 
comes from baud (merry), baudiment (merrily), s'ebaudir (to make merry). You 
are kind and cheerful.' — 'No, no, I am wicked and sad.'" Louis Thomas, Cu- 
riosites sir Baudelaire (Paris , 1912), pp. 23-24. [ J8a,l] 

Jnles Janin published an article in 1865, in L'Independanee beige, reproaching 
Heine for his melancholy; Baudelaire drafted a letter in response. "Baudelaire 
maintains that melancholy is the source of all sincere poetry." Louis Thomas, 
Curiosites sur Baudelaire (Paris, 1912), p. 17. [J8a,2] 

On a visit to an Academician, 511 Baudelaire refers to Les Fleurs du bien that ap- 
peared in 1858 and claims the name of the author — Henry (probably Henri) Bor- 
deaux — as his own pseudonym. See L. Thomas, Curiosites sur Baudelaire (Paris, 
1912), p. 4.3. [J8a,3] 

"On the lie Saint-Louis , Baudelaire felt at home everywhere; he was as perfectly at 
his ease in the street or on the quays as he would have been in his own room. To go 
out into the island was in no way to quit his domain. Thus, one met him in slippers, 
hareheaded, and dressed in the tunic that served as his work clothes." Louis 
Thomas, Curiosites sur Baudelaire(Paris, 1912), p. 27. [J8a,4] 

"'When I'm utterly alone,'' he wrote in 1864, 'I'll seek out a religion (Tihetan or 
Japanese), for I despise the Koran too much, and on my deathhed I'll forswear 
that last religion to show beyond douht my disgust with universal stupidity. 
Louis Thomas, Curiosites sur Baudelaire (Paris, 1912), pp. 57-58. [J8a,5] 

Baudelaire's production is masterly and assured from the beginning. [J 9 J] 

Dates. Hem s du ma/: 1857, 1861, 1866. Poe: 1809-1849. Baudelaire's discovery 
of Poe: around the end of 1846. [J9,2] 

Remy de Gourmont has drawn a parallel hetween Athalie's dream and "Les Meta- 
morphoses dn vampire"; Fontainas has endeavored to do likewise with Hugo's 
"Fantomes" (in Les Orientates) and "Les Petites Vieilles." Hugo: "How many 
maidens fair, alas! I've seen fade and die. . . . One form, above all . . ." f,u [ J9,3] 

Laforgue on Baudelaire: "After all the liherties of Romanticism, he was the first to 
discover these crude comparisons which suddenly, in the midst of a harmonious 
period, cause him to put his foot in his plate; palpahle, exaggerated comparisons 
which seem at times downright American; disconcerting purplish flash and dazzle: 
'Night was thickening . . . like a partition!' (Other examples abound.) <Her walk is 
like> a serpent at the end of a stick; her hair is an ocean; her head sways with the 
gentleness of a young elephant; her hody leans like a frail vessel pluuging its 
yardarms into the water; her saliva mounts to her mouth like a wave swollen by the 



melting of rumhling glaciers; her neck is a tower of ivory; her teeth are sheep 
perched on the hills ahove Hebron. — This is Americanism superimposed on the 
metaphorical language of the 'Song of Songs.'" Jules Laforgue, Melanges post- 
hiunes (Paris, 1903), pp. 113-114. ("Notes sur Baudelaire")."' Compare J86a,3. 

[J9.4] 

"In the fogs along the Seine, the storm of his youth and the marine suns of his 
memories have loosened the strings of an incurably plaintive and shrill Byzantine 
viol." Jules Laforgue, Melanges posthumes (Paris, 1903), p. 114. ("Notes sur 
Baudelaire")." 2 [J9,5] 

When the first edition of Les Fleurs du mal appeared, Baudelaire was thirty-six 
years old. [ J9,6] 

Le Vavasseur describes him around 1844: "Byron attired like Beau Brummell." 

[J9>7] 

The Petits Poemes en prose were first collected posthumously. [ J9,8] 

"He was the lirst to hreak with the public." Laforgue, Melanges posthumes (Paris, 
1903), p. 115* [ J9.9] 

"Baudelaire the cat, Hindu, Yankee, episcopal, alchemist. — Cat: his way of saying 
'my dear' in that solemn piece that opens with 'Behave, my Sorrow!' — Yankee: 
the use of 'very' hefore an adjective; his eurt descriptions of landscape, and the 
line 'Mount, my spirit, wander at your ease,' which the initiated recite in metallic 
tones; his hatred of eloquence and of poetic confidences; 'Vaporous pleasure will 
drift out of sight / As . . .' what then'.'' Hugo, Gautier, and others before him would 
have made a French, oratorical comparison; he makes a Yankee one and, without 
settled prejudice, remains in the air: 'As a sylphid pirouettes into the wings' (you 
can see the iron wires and stage machinery). — Hindu: his poetry is closer to the 
Indian than that of Leconte de Lisle with all his erudition and dazzling intricacy: 
'of sohhing fountains and of birds that sing / endless ohbligatos to my trysts.' 
Neither a great heart nor a great intellect, hut what plaintive nerves! What open 
senses! What a magical voice!" Jules Laforgue, Melanges posthumes (Paris, 1903), 
pp. 118-119 ("Notes sur Baudelaire")." 1 [ J9a,l] 

One of the few clearly articulated passages of the Argunmt du lhre stir la Bel- 
gique— in chapter 27, "Promenade a Malines": "Profane airs, adapted to peals of 
bells. Through the crossing and recrossing melodies, I seemed to hear notes from 
"La Marseillaise." The hymn of the rabble, as broadcast from the belfries, had 
lost a little of its harshness. Chopped into small pieces by the hammers, this was 
not the usual gloomy howling; rather, it had taken on, to my ears, a childish 
grace. It was as though the Revolution had learned to stutter in the language of 



heaven." Baudelaire, Oeuvres, vol. 2, ed. Y<ves>-G<erard> Le Dantec <Paris, 1931— 
1932>, p. 725. [J9a,2] 



From the "Note detachee" in the book on Belgium: "I am no dupe, and I have 
never been a dupe! I say, 'Long live the Revolution!' as I would say, 'Long live 
Destruction! Long live Expiation! Long live Punishment! Long live Death!'" 
Baudelaire, Oeuvres, vol. 2, ed. Y.-G. Le Dantec, pp. 727-728/' 5 [J9a,3] 

Argument du livre sur la Belgique, chapter 25, "Architecture — Churches — Relig- 
ions." "Brussels. Churches: Sainte-Gudule. Magnificent stained-glass windows. 
Beautiful intense colors, like those with which a profound soul invests all the 
objects of life." Baudelaire, Oeuvres, vol. 2, ed. Y.-G. Le Dantec, p. 722. — "Mort 
dcs amants" — Jugendstil — Hashish. [ }9a,4] 

"I asked myself whether Baudelaire . . . had not sought, through histrionics and 
psychic transfer, to revive the adventures of the prince of Denmark. . . . There 
would have been nothing surprising in his having performed for himself the drama 
of Elsinore." Leon Daudet, Flambeaux (Paris <1929>), p. 210 ("Baudelaire"). 

[Jio.i] 

"The inner life . . . of Charles Baudelaire . . . seems to have passed . . . inconstant 
fluctuation between euphoria and aura. Hence the double character of his poems, 
which, on the one hand, represent a luminous beatitude and, on the other, a state 
of . . . taedium vitae." Leon Daudet, Flambeaux (Paris), p. 212 ("Baudelaire"). 

[J10.2] 

Jeanne Duval, Madame Sabatier, Marie Daubrun. [J10,3] 

"Baudelaire was out of place in the stupid nineteenth century. He belongs to the 
Renaissance. . . . This can be felt even in the beginnings of his poems, which recall 
those of Ronsard." Leon Daudet, Flambeaux (Paris), p. 216 ("Baudelaire: Le 
Malaise et i'aura'"). [ J10.4] 

Leon Daudet voices a very unfavorable judgment on Sainte-Beuve's Baudelaire. 

[J10.5] 

Among those who have pictured the city of Paris, Balzac is, so to speak, the 
primitive; his human figures are larger than the streets they move in. Baudelaire 
is the first to have conjured up the sea of houses, with its multistory waves. 
Perhaps in a context with Haussmann. [ J10,G] 

"The baudelaire ... is a kind of cutlass. . . . Broad and short and double- 
edged, . . . the baudelaire ensures a deadly thrust, for the hand that holds it is 
near the point." Victor-Emile Michelet, Figures d'evocateurs (Paris, 1913), p. 18 
("Baudelaire, ou Le Divinateur douloureux"). [J10,7] 



"The dandy, Baudelaire has said, 'should aspire to be sublime, continually. He 
should live and sleep in front of a mirror. " ,f>6 Louis Thomas, Curiosites sur Baude- 
laire (Paris, 1912), pp. 33-34. [J10,8] 



Two stanzas by Baudelaire, found on the page of an album: 

Noble strong-armed woman, who sleep and dream 

throughout long days with no thought of good or evil, 

who wear robes proudly slung in Grecian style; 

you whom for many years (which seem slow to me now) 

my lips, well versed in luscious kisses, 

cherished with all the devotion of a monk; 

priestess of debauch, my sister in lust, 
who disdained to carry and nourish 
a male child in your hallowed urn, 
hut fear and flee the appalling stigmata 
which virtue carved with its degrading blade 
in pregnant matrons' flanks/' 7 

Louis Thomas, Curiosites sur Baudelaire (Paris, 1912), p. 37. [ J10,9] 



"He was the^irst to write about himself in a moderate confessional manner, and to 
leave off the inspired tone. / He was the first to speak of Paris from the point of 
view of one of her daily damned (the lighted gas jets flickering with the wind of 
Prostitution, the restaurants and their air vents, the hospitals, the gambling, the 
logs resounding as they are sawn and then dropped on the paved courtyards, and 
the chimney corner, and the cats, beds, stockings, drunkards, and modern per- 
fumes) — all in a noble, remote, and superior fashion. . . . The first also who ac- 
cuses himself rather than appearing triumphant, who shows his wounds, his 
laziness, his bored uselessness at the heart of this dedicated, workaday century. / 
The first to bring to our literature the boredom implicit in sensuality, together with 
its strange decor: the sad alcove, . . . and to take pleasure in doing so. . . . The 
Painted Mask of Woman and its heavenly extension in sunset . . . Spleen and 
illness (not the poetic aspects of consumption but rather neurosis) without ever 
once using the word." Laforgue, Melanges posthumes (Paris, 1903), pp. 111- 
112. 68 [JlOa.l] 



"From the mysterious darkness in which they had germinated, sent out secret 
roots, and reared their fecund stalks, Les Fleurs du mal have gone on to blossom 
magnificently, opening up their somber jagged corollas veined with the colors of 
life and, under an endless sky of glory and scandal, scattering their heady per- 
fumes of love, of sorrow, and of death." Henri de Regnier, ("Baudelaire et Les 
Fleurs du mal," introductory essay> in Charles Baudelaire, "Les Fleurs du mal" et 
autres poemes (Paris <1930>), p. 18. [J10a,2] 



"He is always polite to what is ugly." Jules Laforgue, Melanges posthumes (Paris, 
1903), p. 114. M [J10a,3] 



Roger Allard — in Baudelaire et"V Esprit nouveau" (Paris, 1918), p. 8 — compares 
Baudelaire's poems to Madame Sabatier with Ronsard's poems to Helene. 

[J10a,4] 

"Two writers profoundly influenced Baudelaire, or rather two books. . . . One is 
the delicious Diable amoureux, by Cazotte; the other, Diderot's La Religieuse. To 
the first, many of the poems owe their restless frenzy . . . ; with Diderot, Baude- 
laire gathers the somber violets of Lesbos." At this point, in a note, a citation from 
Apollinaire's commentary to his edition of Baudelaire's Oeuvres poetiques: "One 
would probably not go wrong in taking Cazotte as the hyphen that had the 
honor of uniting, in . . . Baudelaire, the spirit of the Revolution's writers with that 
of Edgar Poe." Roger Allard, Baudelaire et "V Esprit nouveau" (Paris, 1918), 
pp. 9-10. <SeeJ20a,2.> [J10a,5] 

"The flavor of late autumn . . . which Baudelaire savored . . . in the literary de- 
composition of low Latin." Roger Allard, Baudelaire et "I'Esprit nouveau" (Paris, 
1918), p. 14. [J11.1] 

"Baudelaire ... is the most musical of French poets, along with Racine and Ver- 
laine. But whereas Racine plays only the violin, Baudelaire plays the whole or- 
chestra." Andre Suares, Preface to Charles Baudelaire, Les Fleurs du mml (Paris, 
1933), pp. xxxiv-xxxv. [Jll,2] 

"If Baudelaire is supremely contained, as no one since Dante has been, it is be- 
cause he always concentrates on the inner life, as Dante focnsed on dogma." Andre 
Suares, Preface to Baudelaire, Les Fleurs du mal (Paris, 1933), p. xxxviii. 

[JH,3] 

Les Fleurs du mal is the Inferno of the nineteenth century. But Baudelaire's de- 
spair carries him infinitely beyond the wrath of Dante." Andre Suares, Preface to 
Baudelaire, Les Fleurs du mal (Paris, 1933), p. xiii. [ J 11, 4] 

"There is no artist in verse snperior to Baudelaire." Andre Suares, Preface to 
Baudelaire, Les Fleurs du mal (Paris, 1933), p. xxiii. [ Jll,5] 

Apollinaire: "Baudelaire is the scion of Laclos and Edgar Poe." Cited in Roger 
Allard, Baudelaire et "VEsprit nouveau" (Paris, 1918), p. 8. [ Jll,6] 

The "Choix de maximes consolantes sur l'amour" <Selected Consolatory Maxims 
on Love> contains an excursus on ugliness (first published March 3, 1846, in Le 
Corsaire-Satan). The beloved has contracted smallpox and suffered scars, which 
from then on are the lover's delight: "You run a grave risk, if your pockmarked 



mistress betrays you, of being able to console yourself only with pockmarked 
women. For certain spirits, more precious and more jaded, delight in ugliness 
proceeds from an obscurer sentiment still — the thirst for the unknown and the 
taste for the horrible. It is this sentiment . . . which drives certain poets into the 
dissecting room or the clinic, and women to public executions. I am sincerely sorry 
for the man who cannot understand this — he is a harp who lacks a hass string!" 
Baudelaire, Oeuvres, vol. 2, ed. Y.-G. Le Dantec, p. 621.™ [JH, 7 ] 

The idea of "correspondences" surfaces already in the "Salon de 1846," where a 
passage of Kreisleriana is cited. (See the note by Le Dantec, Oeuvres, vol. 1, 
p. 585.)" ' [Jll,8] 

In considering the aggressive Catholicism displayed in Baudelaire's later work, 
one must bear in mind that his writing had met with scant success during his 
lifetime. This could have led Baudelaire, in rather unusual fashion, to align 
himself or rather to identify himself with the completed works. His particular 
sensuality found its theoretical equivalents only in the process of poetic composi- 
tion; these equivalents, however, the poet appropriated to himself as such, uncon- 
ditionally and without any sort of revision. They bear the trace of this origin 
precisely in their aggressiveness. [ Jlla,l] 

"He has on a blood-red cravat and rose gloves. Yes, it is 1840. . . . Some years, 
even green gloves were worn. Color disappeared from outfits only reluctantly. For 
Baudelaire was not alone in sporting that purple or brick-colored cravat. Not 
alone in wearing pink gloves. His trademark is in the combination of the two 
effects with the black outfit." Eugene Marsan, Les Cannes de M. Paul Bourget et le 
bon choix de Phdinte (Paris, 1923), pp. 236-237. [Jlla,2] 

"His utterances, Gautier thought, were full of 'capital letters and italics.' He 
appeared . . . surprised at what he himself said, as if he heard in his own voice the 
words of a stranger. But it must be admitted that his women and his sky, his 
perfumes, his nostalgia, his Christianity and his demon, his oceans and his trop- 
ics, made for a suh ject matter of stunning novelty. ... I do not even criticize his 
jerky gait, . . . which made people compare lum to a spider. It was the beginning of 
that angular gesticulation which, little hy little, would displace the rounded graces 
of the old world. Here, too, he is a precursor." Eugene Marsan, Les Cannes de 
M. Paid Bourget et le bon choix de Phdinte (Paris, 1923), pp. 239-240. [ Jlla,3] 

"His gestures were nohle, slow, kept in close to the body. His politeness seemed 
affected hecause it was a legacy of the eighteenth century, Baudelaire being the son 
of an old man who had known the salons." Eugene Marsan, Les Cannes de M. Paul 
Bourget et le bon choix de Phdinte (Paris, 1923), p. 239. [Jlla,4] 



There are two different versions of Baudelaire's dehut in Brussels. 72 Georges 
Rency, who reproduces hoth, prefers the one hy the chronicler Tardieu. "In a 



horrible funk," writes the latter, "Baudelaire read and stammered and trembled, 
his teeth chattering, his nose huried in his manuscript. It was a disaster." Camille 
Lemonnier, on the other hand, came away with the "impression of a magnificent 
talker." Georges Rency, Physionomies litteraires (Brussels, 1907), pp. 267, 268 
("Charles Baudelaire"). [J12.1] 

"He . . . never made a serious effort to understand what was external to him." 
Georges Rency, Physionomies litteraires (Brussels, 1907), p. 274 ("Charles 
Baudelaire"). [J12,2] 

"Baudelaire is as incapahle of love as of labor. He loves as he writes, by lits and 
starts, and then relapses into the dissolute egoism of a flaneur. Never does he show 
the slightest curiosity about human affairs or the slightest consciousness of human 
evolution. . . . His art could therefore be said ... to sin by reason of its narrow- 
ness and singularity; these, indeed, are defects which put off sane and upright 
minds such as love clear works of universal import." Georges Rency, Physiono- 
mies litteraires (Brussels, 1907), p. 288 ("Charles Baudelaire"). [ J12,3] 

"Like many another author of his day, he was not a writer but a stylist. His images 
are almost always inappropriate. He will say of a look that it is 'gimlet-sharp.' . . . 
He will call repentance 'the last hostelry.' . . . Baudelaire is a still worse writer in 
prose than in verse. . . . He does not even know grammar. 'No French writer,' he 
says, 'ardent for the glory of the nation, can, without pride and without regrets, 
divert his gaze. . .' The solecism here is not only flagrant; it is foolish." Edmond 
Scherer, Etudes sur la litterature contemporaine, vol. 4 (Paris, 1886), pp. 288- 
289 ("Baudelaire"). [J12.4] 

"Baudelaire is a sign not of decadence in letters but of the general lowering of 
intelligence." Edmond Scherer, Etudes sur la litterature contemporaine, vol. 4 
(Paris, 1886), p. 291 ("Charles Baudelaire"). [J12.5] 

Brunetiere recognizes, with Gautier, that Baudelaire has opened new territory for 
poetry. Among the criticisms registered against him by the literary historian is 
this: "Moreover, he was a poet who lacked more than one element of his art — nota- 
bly (according to people who knew him) the gift of thinking directly in verse." 
F<erdinand> Brunetiere, L'Evolution de la poesie lyrique en France au XIX" 
siecle, vol. 2 (Paris, 1894), p. 232 ("Le Symbolisme"). [J12.6] 

Brunetiere (L'Evolution de la poesie lyrique en France au XIX" siecle, vol. 2 
[Paris, 1894]) distinguishes Baudelaire on one side from the school of Rusltin, and 
on the other from the Russian novelists. In both these movements he sees currents 
which, with good reason, resist the decadence proclaimed by Baudelaire, opposing 
to everything hypercultivated the primitive simplicity and innocence of natural 
man. A synthesis of these antithetical tendencies would he represented by Wag- 



ner. — Brunetiere arrived at this relatively positive estimation of Baudelaire only 
helatedly(1892). [J12a,l] 



On Baudelaire in relation to Hugo and Gautier: "He treats the great masters he 
learned from as he treats women: he adores and vilifies them." U.-V. Chatelain, 
Baudelaire, I'homme et le poete (Paris), p. 21. [J12a,2] 

Baudelaire on Hugo: "Not only does he express precisely and translate literally 
what is clearly and distinctly visible, but he expresses with indispensable obscu- 
rity what is obscure and vaguely revealed." Citing this sentence in Baudelaire, 
I'homme et le poete (Paris), p. 22, Chatelain rightly says that Baudelaire is perhaps 
the only man of his time to have understood the "secret Mallarmeism" of Hugo. 

[J12a,3] 

"Barely sixty people followed the hearse in the sweltering heat; Banville and 
Asselineau, under a gathering storm, made beautiful speeches that nobody could 
hear. With the exception of Veuillot in L'Univers, the press was cruel. Everything 
bore down on his remains. A gale dispersed his friends; his enemies . . . called 
him 'mad.'" U.-V. Chatelain, Baudelaire, I'homme et le poete (Paris), p. 16. 

[J12a,4] 

For the experience of the correspondances, Baudelaire refers occasionally to 
Swedenborg, and also to hashish. [J12a,5] 

Baudelaire at a concert: "Two piercing black eyes, gleaming with a peculiar vivid- 
ness, alone animated the figure that seemed frozen in its shell." Lorcdan Larchey, 
Fragments de souvenirs (Paris, 1901), p. 6 ("Le Boa de Baudelaire — L'lmpecca- 
hle Banville"). [J12a,6] 

Larchey is an eyewitness to Baudelaire's first visit to an Academician — a call paid 
to Jules Sandeau. Larchey finds himself in the entrance hall soon after Baudelaire. 
"When I arrived, ... at the appointed hour, a bizarre spectacle informed me I had 
been preceded. All around the hat-pegs of the antechamber was coiled a long 
scarlet hoa, one of those boas in chenille of which young working-class women are 
particularly fond." L. L<archey, Fragments de souvenirsy, p. 7. [ J12a,7] 

Tableau of decadence: "Behold our great cities under the fog of tobacco smoke 
that envelops them, thoroughly sodden by alcohol, infused with morphine: it is 
there that humanity comes unhinged. Rest assured that this source breeds more 
epileptics, idiots, and assassins than poets." Maurice Barres, La Folie de Charles 
Baudelaire (Paris <1926>), pp. 104-105. [J13.1] 

"In conclusion, I would like to imagine that a government such as we conceive after 
the model of Hobbes would strive to arrest, by some vigorous therapeutic met hod, 
the spread of these doctrines, which are as productive of malingerers and trouhle- 



makers as they are useless for forming citizens. . . . But I think that the wise 
despot, after careful reflection, would refrain from intervening, faithful to the 
tradition of an agreeable philosophy: Apres nous le deluge.' 1 '' Maurice Barres, La 
Folie de Charles Baudelaire (Paris), pp. 103-104. [J13.2] 

"Baudelaire was perhaps only a hard-working soul who felt and understood what 
was new through Poe, and who disciplined himself in the course of his life to 
become specialized." Maurice Barres, La Folie de Charles Baudelaire (Paris), 
p. 98. [J13.3] 

"Let us perhaps guard against taking these poets too quickly for Christians. The 
liturgical language, the angels, the Satans . . . are merely a mise en scene for the 
artist who judges that the picturesque is well worth a Mass." 73 Maurice Barres, La 
Folie de Charles Baudelaire (Paris), pp. 44-45. [ J13,4] 

"His best pages are overwhelming. He rendered superb prose into difficult verse." 
Maurice Barres, La Folie de Charles Baudelaire (Paris), p. 54. [ J13,5] 

"Scattered across the sky like luminous seeds of gold and silver, radiatingoutfrom 
the deep darkness of night, the stars represent [for Baudelaire] the ardor and 
energy of the human imagination." Elisabeth Schinzel, ISatur und Natursymbolik 
bei Poe, Baudelaire und den franzdsischen Symbolisten (Diiren [Rhineland], 
1931), p. 32. [J13.6] 

"His voice . . . muffled like the nighttime rumble of vehicles, filtering into plushly 
upholstered bedrooms." Maurice Barres, La Folie de Charles Baudelaire (Paris), 
p. 20. [J13.7] 

"It might seem, at first, that Baudelaire's oeuvre was relatively infertile. Some wits 
compared it to a narrow basin dug with effort in a gloomy spot shrouded in 
haze. . . . The influence of Baudelaire was revealed in Le Parnasse contemporain 
... of 1865. . . . Three figures emerge: . . . Stephane Mallarme, Paul Verlaine, and 
Maurice Rollinat." Maurice Barres, La Folie de Charles Baudelaire (Paris), 
pp. 61, 63, 65. [J13.8] 

"And the place occupied hy racial epithets among the rabble at that time!" 
Maurice Barres, La Folie de Charles Baudelaire (Paris), p. 40. [ J13a,l] 

Flaubert to Baudelaire: "You praise the flesh without loving it, Lti a melancholy, 
detached way that I find sympathetic. Ah! how well you understand the boredom 
of existence!" 74 Cited in Maurice Barres, La Folie de Charles Baudelaire (Paris), 
p. 31. [J13a,2] 



Baudelaire's predilection for Juvenal may well have to do with the latter's being 
one of the first urban poets. Compare this observation by Thibaudet: "hi survey- 



ing the great epochs of urban life, we see that the more the city provides poets 
and other people with their intellectual and moral life, the more forcefully poetry 
is pushed outside the city. When, ... in the Greek world, that life was fostered 
within the great cosmopolitan centers of Alexandria and Syracuse, these cities 
gave birth to pastoral poetry. When the Rome of Augustus came to occupy a 
similar position of centrality, the same poetry of shepherds, ... of pristine nature, 
appeared with the Bucolics and the Georgics of Virgil. And in eighteenth-century 
France, at the most brilliant moment ... of Parisian existence, the pastoral re- 
appears as part of a return to antiquity. . . . The only poet in whom one might 
find a foretaste of Baudelairean urbanism (and of other things Baudelairean as 
well) would be perhaps, at certain moments, Saint-Amant." Albert Thibaudet, 
Interieurs (Paris <1924>), pp. 7-9. [J13a,3] 

"In passing from all these Romantic poets to Baudelaire, we pass from a landscape 
of nature to a landscape of stone and llesh. ... A religious awe of nature, which, 
for these . . . Romantics, was part of their familiarity with nature, has become 
with Baudelaire a hatred of nature." [?] [J13a,4] 

Baudelaire on Musset: "Except at the age of one's first Communion — in other 
words, at the age when everything having to do with prostitutes and silk stockings 
produces a religious effect — I have never been able to endure that paragon of 
lady-killers, his spoilecl-child's impudence, invoking heaven and hell in tales of 
dinner-table conversations, his muddy torrent of mistakes in grammar and pros- 
ody, and finally his utter incapacity to understand the process by which a reverie 
becomes a work of art." 75 Thibaudet, who quotes this remark in Interieurs (p. 15), 
juxtaposes it with one by Brunetiere on Baudelaire: "He's just a Satan with a 
furnished apartment, a Beelzehuh of the dinner table" (p. 16). [J13a,5] 

"A sonnet like 'A Une Passante' <To a Woman Passing By>, a stanza like the last 
stanza of that sonnet 76 . . . could blossom only in the milieu of a great capital, 
where human beings live together as strangers to one another and yet as travelers 
on the same journey. Among all the capitals, Paris alone produces such beings as a 
natural fruit." Albert Thihaudet, Interieurs (Paris), pp. 22 ("Baudelaire"). 

[J14.1] 

"He carried about him as sorrowful trophy ... a burden of memories, so that he 
seemed to live in a continual paramnesia. . . . The poet carries within himself a 
living duree <perduration> which odors call forth . . . and with which they min- 
gle. .. . This city is a duree, an inveterate life-form, a memory. ... If he loved in 
... a Jeanne Duval some immemorial stretch of night . . . , this will be only a 
symbol ... of that true duree . . . that is consubstantial with the life and being of 
Paris, the duree of those very old, rumpled creatures who (it seemed to him) ought 
to form, like the capital itself, massive blocks and unending embankments of 
memories." (Reference is to "Les Petites Vieilles.") Albert Thihaudet, Interieurs 
(Paris), pp. 24-27 ("Baudelaire"). [ J14,2] 



Thibauclet juxtaposes Baudelaire's "Une Charogne" <Carrion> with Gautier's "La 
Comedie de la mort" <The Comedy of Death) and Hugo's "L'Epopee du ver" <The 
Epic of the Wormxl nterieurs, p. 46>. [ J14,3] 

Thibaudet adverts very apdy to the connection between confession and mys- 
tification in Baudelaire. Through the latter, Baudelaire's pride compensates itself 
for the former. "Ever since Rousseau's Confessions, it seems that all our literature 
of the personal has taken its departure from the broken-down furniture of relig- 
ion, from a debunked confessional." Thibaudet, Interieurs (Paris), p. 47 ("Baude- 
laire"). Mystification a figure of original sin. [J14,4] 



Thibaudet (Interieurs, p. 34) cites a remark from 1887, in wliich Brunetiere calls 
Baudelaire "a species of oriental idol, monstrous and misshapen, whose natural 
deformity is heightened by strange colors." [ J14,5] 

In 1859 Mistral's Mireille appeared. Baudelaire was incensed at the book's suc- 
cess. [J14.6] 



Baudelaire to Vigny: "The only praise I ask for this book is that readers recognize 
it's not a mere album, but has a beginning and an end." 77 Cited in Thibaudet, 
Interieurs (Paris), p. 5. [ J14,7] 



Thibaudet concludes his essay on Baudelaire with the allegory of the sick muse, 
who, on Rastignac Hill on the Right Bank of the Seine, forms a pendant to the 
Montagne Sainte-Genevieve on the Left Bank (pp. 60-61). [ J14,8] 



Baudelaire: "of all our great poets, the one who writes worst — if Alfred de Vigny 
be excepted." Thibaudet, Interieurs (Paris), p. 58 ("Baudelaire"). [ J14,9] 



Poulet-Malassis had his "shop" in the Passage des Princes, called in those days the 
Passage Mires. [J14a,l] 

"Violet boa on which curled his long graying locks, carefully maintained, which 
gave him a somewhat clerical appearance." < Jules Husson> Champlleury, Souve- 
nirs et portraits de jeunesse (Paris, 1872), p. 144' ("Rencontre de Baudelaire"). 

[J14a,2] 



"He worked, not always consciously, at that misunderstanding which isolated him 
in his own time; he worked at it all the more as this misunderstanding was already 
taking shape in himself. His private notes, published posthumously, are painfully 
revealing in this respect. ... As soon as this artist of incomparable subtlety speaks 
of himself, he is astonishingly awkward. Irreparably he lacks pride — to the point 
where he reckons incessantly with fools, either to astound them, to shock them, or 
after all to inform them that he absolutely does not reckon with fools." Andre 



Gide, Preface to Charles Baudelaire, Les Fleurs du mal, ed. Edouard Pelletan 
(Paris, 1917), pp. xiii-xiv. 78 [J14a,3] 

'"This hook has not been written for my wives, my daughters, or my sisters,' he 
says, speaking of Les Fleurs du mal. Why warn us? Why this sentence? Oh, simply 
for the pleasure of affronting bourgeois morals, with the words 'my wives' slipped 
in, as if carelessly. He values them, however, since we find in his private journal: 
'This cannot shock my wives, my daughters, or my sisters.'" Andre Gide, Preface 
to Charles Baudelaire, Les Fleurs du mal, ed. Edouard Pelletan (Paris, 1917), 
p. xiv. 7 " [J14a,4] 

"Without doubt, Baudelaire is the artist about whom the most nonsense has been 
written." Andre Gide, Preface to Ch<arles> B<audelaire>, Les Fleurs du mal, ed. 
Edouard Pelletan (Paris, 1917), p. xii. l,u [J14a,5] 

"Les Fleurs du mal is dedicated to what Gautier claimed to be: magician of French 
letters, pure artist, impeccable writer — and this was a way of saying: Do not be 
deceived; what I venerate is the art and not the thought; my poems will have merit 
not because of their movement, passion, or thought, but because of their form." 
Andre Gide, Preface to Ch. B., Les Fleurs du mal, ed. Edouard Pelletan (Paris, 
1917), pp. xi-xii. m [J14a,6] 

"Now he quietly converses with each one of us." Andre Gide, Preface to Ch. B., 
Les Fleurs du mal, ed. E. Pelletan (Paris, 1917), p. xv. IB [ J14a,7] 

Lemaitrc in his article "Baudelaire," published originally in the "Feuilleton 
Dramatique" section of Le Journal des debuts, and written on the occasion of 
Crepet's edition of the Oeuvres posthumes et Correspondances inedites: "Worst of 
all, I sense that the unhappy man is perfectly incapable of developing these sibyl- 
line notes. The pensees of Baudelaire are most often only a sort of painful and 
pretentious stammering. . . . One cannot imagine a less philosophical mind." Jules 
Lemaitre, Les Contemporains, 4th series (Paris, 1895), p. 21 ("Baudelaire"). 
Brooding! <See J55a,l>. [ J15,l] 

After Calcutta. "On his return, he enters into possession of his patrimony, seventy 
thousand francs. Within two years, he has spent half of it. . . . For the next twenty 
years, he lives on the income provided by the remaining thirty-live thousand 
francs. . . . Now, during these twenty years, he runs up no more than ten thousand 
francs in new debts. Under these conditions, as you can imagine, he couldn't have 
indulged very often in Neronian orgies!" Jules Lemaitre, Les Contemporains, 4th 
series (Paris, 1895), p. 27. [J15.2] 



Bourget draws a comparison between Leonardo and Baudelaire: "We are drawn 
irresistibly to prolonged meditation on the enigma of this painter, of this poet. On 



being studiously contemplated, the enigma surrenders its secret." Paul Bourget, 
Essais de psychologie contemporaine, vol. 1 (Paris, 1901), p. 4 ("Baudelaire"). 

[J15.3] 

"He excels at beginning a poem with words of unforgettable solemnity, at once 
tragic and rueful: 'What does it matter to me that you are wise? / Be lovely — and 
be sad! . . . ' Elsewhere: "Sudden as a knife you thrust / into my sorry heart. . . . ' 
And elsewhere: "Pensive as cattle resting on the beach, / they are staring out to 
sea. . . ."' Paul Bourget, Essais de psychologie contemporaine, vol. 1 (Paris, 
1901), pp. 3-4. ra [J15.4] 

Bourget sees in Benjamin Constant, Amiel, and Baudelaire three kindred spirits, 
intellects stamped by the esprit d' analyse, types determined by decadence. The 
detailed appendix to "Baudelaire" is concerned with Constant's Adolphe. To- 
gether with the spirit of analysis, Bourget considers enmu an element of deca- 
dence. The third and last chapter of his essay on Baudelaire, "Theorie de la 
decadence," develops this idea with reference to the late Roman Empire. [ J15,5] 

1849 or 1850: Baudelaire draws from memory the head of Blanqui. See Philippe 
Soupault, Baudelaire (Paris <1931>), illustration on p. 15. [ J15,6] 

"It is all a harmony of artifices, of deliberate contradictions. Let us try to note 
some of these. Realism and idealism are mingled. Along with description that takes 
extravagant pleasure in the most dismal details of physical reality there is, at the 
same time, refined expression of ideas and beliefs that exceed the immediate im- 
pression made on us by bodies — There is a union of the most profound sensuality 
with Christian asceticism. 'A horror of life, and an ecstatic joy in life,' writes 
Baudelaire somewhere."' 1 . . . There is also, speaking of love, the combination of 
adoration and contempt for woman. . . . Woman is seen as a slave, as an ani- 
mal, . . . yet to her the same homage, the same prayers are addressed as to the 
immaculate Virgin. Or rather, she is seen as the universal trap . . . and worshipped 
for her deadly power. And that is not all: even as one seeks to render the most 
ardent passion, one also labors to find for it . . . the most unexpected form . . . — 
that is, what bespeaks the greatest sang-froid and even absence of passion. . . . 
One believes, or one pretends to believe, in the devil; he is envisaged by turns, or 
simultaneously, as the Father of Evil and as the great Loser and great Victim; and 
one delights in proclaiming one's impiety in the language of . . . the faithful. 'Pro- 
gress' is cursed; the industrial civilization of the century is execrated, . . . and, at 
the same time, the poet revels in the special color and brilliancy this civilization 
has brought to human life. . . . Such, I believe, is the basic intent of Baudelairism: 
always to unite two opposed orders of feeling . . . and, at bottom, two divergent 
conceptions of the world and of life — the Christian and the other, or, if you like, 
the past and the present. It is a masterpiece of the Will (like Baudelaire, I capital- 
ize), the last word in inventiveness in the realm of feeling." Jules Lemaitre, Les 
Contemporains, 4th series (Paris, 1895), pp. 28-31 ("Baudelaire"). [ J15a,l] 



Lemaitre observes that Baudelaire really did create a poncif, a cliche, as he set out 
to do. [J15a,2] 



"The bloody apparatus of destruction" — where is this phrase in Baudelaire? In 
"La Destruction." 115 [ J15a,3] 

"You could put him down as the perfect embodiment of the 'Parisian pessimist,' 
two words which earlier would have jarred on being coupled." Paul Bourget, 
Essais de psychologie contemporaine, vol. 1 (Paris, 1901), p. 14. [ J15a,4] 

Baudelaire had briefly considered reproducing, as the frontispiece to the second 
edition of Les Flews, a dance of death by H. Langlois. [J15a,5] 

"Three different men inhabit this man at one and the same time. . . . These three 
men are all quite modern, and more modern still is their synthesis. The crisis of 
religious faith, the city life of Paris, and the scientific spirit of the age . . . are so 
thoroughly allied here as to appear inseparable. . . . Faith has died out, whereas 
mysticism, though intellectually discredited, still permeates the sensibility. . . . We 
could note . . . the use of liturgical terminology to celebrate sensual pleasure ... or 
that curious work of 'prose' in decadent Latin style which he entitled 'Franciscae 
meae laudes.' . . . On the other hand, his libertine tastes came from Paris. Every- 
where in his . . . poems is a backdrop of Parisian vice, as well as a backdrop of 
Catholic ritual. He has obviously penetrated — and with hair-raising experiences, 
we may be sure — the most wretched strata of this unchaste city. He has eaten at 
common dinner tables beside painted women whose mouths drip blood through 
masks of ceruse. He has slept in brothels, and has known the rancor of broad 
daylight illuminating, along with the faded curtains , the still more faded face of the 
woman-for-hire. He has sought out . . . the unthinking spasm that . . . cures the 
mal de penser. And, at the same time, he has stopped and chatted at every street- 
corner in town. . . . He has led the life of the literary man, . . . and he has . . . 
whetted the blade of his spirit where that of others would have been dulled." Paul 
Bourget, Essais de psychologie contemporaine, vol. 1 (Paris, 1901), pp. 7-9 
("Baudelaire"). [J 16,1] 

Riviere provides a sequence of felicitous glosses on Baudelaire's poetic proce- 
dure: "Strange procession of words! Sometimes like a weariness of the voice, . . . 
an utterance full of frailty: 'I dream of new flowers, but who can tell / if this 
sordid swamp of mine affords / the mystic nourisliment on which they thrive [qui 
ferait leur vigueur].' Or: 'a favoring Goddess makes the desert bloom [Cybele, qui 
les aime, augmente ses verdures]. . . .' Like those who feel themselves completely 
in command of what they want to say, he seeks at first the most remote of terms; 
he then invites their approach, conciliates them, and infuses them with a quality 
you would not have thought could be theirs. . . . Such poetiy cannot be the 
product of inspiration. . . . And just as the unfolding thought . . . slowly breaks 
free of the obscurity in which it began, so the poetic trajectory retains a certain 



slowness from its long virtuality: 'How sweet the greenish light of your elongated 
eyes.' . . . Every one of Baudelaire's poems is a movement. . . . Each constitutes 
some particular phrase, question, reminder, invocation, or dedication, which has 
a specific direction." Jacques Riviere, Etudes (Paris), pp. 14-18. 80 [ J16.2] 

Frontispiece (by Rops) to the collection of Baudelaire's poems entitled Les Epaves 
<Wreckage>. It presents a multifaceted allegory. — Plan to use an etching by Brac- 
quemond as the frontispiece to the (second edition of> Les Fleurs du mal. Baude- 
laire describes it: "A skeleton turning into a tree, with legs and ribs forming the 
trunk, the arms stretched out to make a cross and bursting into leaves and buds, 
sheltering several rows of poisonous plants in little pots, lined up as if in a gar- 
dener's hothouse."" 7 [ J16,3] 

Curious notion of Soupault's: "Almost all of the poems are more or less directly 
inspired by a print or a painting. . . . Can it be said that he sacrificed to fashion? 
He dreaded being alone. . . . His weakness ohliged him to look for things to lean 
on." Philippe Soupault, Baudelaire (Paris <1931>), p. 64. [ J16a,l] 

"In the years of his maturity and resignation, he never spoke a word of regret or 
complaint about his childhood." Arthur Holitscher, "Charles Baudelaire," Die 
Literatur, vol. 12, pp. 14—15. [ J16a,2] 

"These images ... do not aim to caress our imagination; they are distant and 
studied, the way a voice sounds when it emphasizes something. . . . Like a word 
spoken in our ear when we least expected it, the poet is suddenly hard hy: 'You 
remember? You remember what I'm saying? Where did we see that together, we 
who don't even know each other?" Jacques Riviere, Etudes (Paris), pp. 18-19. 

[J16a,3] 

"Baudelaire understood the clairvoyance of the heart that does not acknowledge 
all it experiences. ... It is a hesitation, a holding back, a modest gaze." Jacques 
Riviere, Etudes (Paris), p. 21. [J16a,4] 

"Lines of verse so perfect, so measured, that at first one hesitates to grant them all 
their meaning. A hope stirs for a minute — douht as to their profundity. But one 
need only wait." Jacques Riviere, Etudes (Paris), p. 22. [J16a,5] 

On Baudelaire's "Crepuscule du matin" (Twilight of Daybreak): "Each line of 
"Crepuscule du matin" — without stridency, with devotion — evokes a misfortune." 
Jacques Riviere, Etudes (Paris), p. 29. [ J16a,6] 



"The devotion of a heart moved to ecstasy by weakness. . . . Though he speaks of 
the most horrible things, the fierceness of his respect lends him a subtle decency." 
Jacques Riviere, Etudes (Paris), pp. 27-28. [J16a,7] 



According to Champfleury, Baudelaire would have nought up all the unsold items 
from the Salon of 1845. [J16a,8] 



"Baudelaire knew the art of transforming his features as well as any escaped 
convict." <Jules> Champfleury, Souvenirs et portraits de jeunesse (Paris, 1872), 
p. 135 ("Rencontre de Baudelaire"). — Courhet complained of the trouble he had 
completing the portrait of Baudelaire ; the subject looked different from onedayto 
the next. [J16a,9] 

Baudelaire's liking for porter. [ J16a,10] 

"Baudelaire's favorite flowers were neither daisy, carnation, nor rose; he would 
break into raptures at the sight of those thick-leaved plants that look like vipers 
ahout to fall on their prey, or spiny hedgehogs. Tormented forms, bold forms — 
such was this poet's ideal." Champlleury, Souvenirs et portraits de jeunesse 
(Paris, 1872), p. 143. [J16a,ll] 

Gide, in his preface to Les Fleurs du mal, lays emphasis on the "centrifugal and 
disintegrating" force which Baudelaire, like Dostoevsky, recognized in himself and 
which he felt to he in opposition to his productive concentration (p. xvii). 8 " 

: J i7,i: 

"This taste for Boileau and Racine was not an affectation in Baudelaire. . . . There 
is sometliing more in Les Fleurs du mal than the 'thrill of the new'; there is a 
return to traditional French verse. . . . Even in his nervous malaise, Baudelaire 
retains a certain sanity. " Remy de Gourmont, Promenades litteraires, 2nd series 
(Paris, 1906), pp. 85-86 ("Baudelaire et le songe d'Athalie"). [ J17,2] 

Poe (as cited in Remy de Gourmont, Promenades litteraires [Paris, 1904.], p. 371: 
"Marginalia sur Edgar Poe et sur Baudelaire"): "The assurance of the wrong or 
error of any action is often the one unconquerahle force which impels us, and 
alone impels us, to its prosecution."" 9 [J17,3] 

Construction of "L'Echec de Baudelaire" (Baudelaire's defeat>, by Rene La- 
forgue. As a child, Baudelaire is supposed to have witnessed the coitus of his nurse 
or his mother with her (first or second?) husband; he would find himself in the 
position of third person in a love relationship and would settle down in that posi- 
tion; he would become a voyeur and frequent bordellos mainly as a voyeur; owing 
to this same fixation on the visual, he would hecome a critic and experience a need 
for ohjectivity, "so that nothing is 'lost to view.'" lie would helong to a clearly 
defined category of patients: "For them, to see means to soar above everything, 
like eagles, in complete security, and to realize a sort of omnipotence by identifica- 
tion at once with the man and with the woman. . . . These are the people who then 
develop that fatal taste for the ahsolute . . . , and who, taking refuge in the domain 



of pure imagination, lose the use of their hearts" (L'Echec de Baudelaire [Paris, 
1931], pp. 201, 204). 911 [J17.4] 



"Baudelaire loved Aupick without being aware of it, and . . . his reason for con- 
tinually provoking his stepfather was in order to be loved by him. ... If Jeanne 
Duval played a part in the poet's emotional life analogous to that played by 
Aupick, we can understand why Baudelaire was . . . sexually possessed by her. 
And so . . . this union stood, rather, for a homosexual union, in which Baudelaire 
chiefly played the passive role — that of the woman." Rene Laforgue, L'Echec de 
Baudelaire (Paris, 1931), pp. 175, 177. 91 [ J17,5] 

His friends sometimes called Baudelaire "Monseigneur Brummell." [J17,6] 

On the compulsion to lie, as seen in Baudelaire: "The direct and spontaneous 
expression of a truth becomes, for these subtle and tormented consciences, the 
ecpiiivalent of success ... in incest; success, that is to say, in a sphere in which it 
can be realized simply by 'good sense.' . . . For in those cases where normal sexu- 
ality is repressed, good sense is fated to lack an object." Rene Laforgue, L'Echec 
de Baudelaire (Paris, 1931), p. 87." 2 [J17.7] 

Anatole France — Lu Vie litteraire, vol. 3 (Paris, 1891) — on Baudelaire: "His leg- 
end, created by his friends and admirers, abounds in marks of bad taste" (p. 20). 
"The most wretched woman encountered at night in the shadows of a disreputahle 
alley takes on, in his mind, a tragic grandeur: seven demons are in them [ ! ] and the 
whole mystical sky looks down on this sinner whose soul is in peril. He tells himself 
that the vilest kisses resound through all eternity, and he hrings to hear on this 
momentary encounter eighteen centuries of devilishness" (p. 22). "He is attracted 
to women only to the point necessary for irrevocable loss of his soul. He is never a 
lover, and he would not even be a debauchee if debauchery were not superlatively 
impious. . . . He would have nothing to do with women if he were not hoping 
that, through them, he could offend God and make the angels weep" (p. 22). 

[J17a,l] 

"At hottom, he had but half a faith. Only his spirit was completely Christian. His 
heart and intellect remained empty. There is a story that one day a naval officer, 
one of his friends, showed him a manitou that he had brought hack from Africa, a 
monstrous little head carved from a piece of wood by a poor hlack man. — Tt is 
awfully ugly,' says the officer, and he threw it away disdainfully. — 'Take care,' 
Baudelaire said in an anxious tone, 'lest it prove the true god!' They were the most 
profound words he ever uttered. He helieved in unknown gods — not least for the 
pleasure of blaspheming." Anatole France, La Vie litteraire, vol. 3 (Paris, 1891), 
p. 23 ("Charles Baudelaire"). [J17a,2] 



Letter to Poulet-Malassis of Fehruary 18, 1860. 



[J17a,3] 



"The hypothesis of Baudelaire's P.G. <paralyse generaley has persisted for half a 
century and still reigns in certain quarters. Nevertheless, it is based on a gross and 
demonstrable error and is without any foundation in fact. . . . Baudelaire did not 
die from P.G. but from softening of the brain, the consequence of a stroke . . . and 
of a hardening of the cerebral arteries." Louis-Antoine-Justine Caubert, La 
Nevrose de Baudelaire (Bordeaux, 1930), pp. 42—43. The argument against gen- 
eral paralysis is made, likewise in a treatise, by Raymond Trial, La Maladie de 
Baudelaire (Paris, 1926), p. 69. But he sees the brain disorder as a consequence of 
syphilis, whereas Caubert believes that syphilis has not been conclusively estab- 
lished in Baudelaire's case (see p. 46); he cites Remond and Voivenel, Le Genie 
litteraire (Paris, 1912), p. 41: "Baudelaire was . . . the victim of sclerosis of the 
cerebral arteries." [ J17a,4] 

In his essay "Le Sadismechez Baudelaire," published in La Chronique medicale of 
November 15, 1902, Cabanes defends the thesis that Baudelaire was a "sadistic 
madman" (p. 727). [J18,l] 

Du Camp on Baudelaire's voyage "to the Indies": "He arranged supplies of live- 
stock for the English army . . . , and rode about on elephants while composing 
verse." Du Camp adds in a note: "I have been told that this anecdote is spurious; I 
have it from Baudelaire himself, and I have no reason to doubt its veracity, though 
it may perhaps be faulted for a surplus of imagination." Maxime Du Camp, Souve- 
nirs litteraires, vol. 2 (Paris, 1906), p. 60. [ J18,2] 

Indicative of the reputation that preceded Baudelaire before he had published 
anything of importance is this remark by Gautier: "I fear that with Baudelaire it 
will be as it once was with Petrus Borel. In our younger days, we used to say: Hugo 
has only to sit and wait; as soon as Petrus publishes something, he will disap- 
pear. . . . Today, the name of Baudelaire is brandished before us; we are told that 
when he publishes his poems, Musset, Laprade, and I will dissolve into thin air. I 
don't believe it for a moment. Baudelaire will burn out just as Petrus did." Cited 
in Maxime Du Camp, Souvenirs litteraires, vol. 2 (Paris, 1906), pp. 61-62. 

[J18.3] 

"As a writer, Baudelaire had one great defect, of which he had no inkling: he was 
ignorant. What he knew, he knew well; but he knew very little. History, physiol- 
ogy, archaeology, philosophy all eluded him. . . . The external world scarcely in- 
terested him; he saw it perhaps, but assuredly he never studied it." Maxime Du 
Camp, Souvenirs litteraires, vol. 2 (Paris, 1906), p. 65. ( J18,4] 

From the evaluations of Baudelaire by his teachers at the Lycee Louis-le-Grand: 
"Ready mind. A few lapses in taste" (in Rhetoric). "Conduct sometimes rather 
unruly. This student, as he himself admits, seems convinced that history is per- 
fectly useless" (in History). — Letter of August 11, 1839, to his stepfather, after 
earning his baccalaureate: "I did rather poorly in my examinations, except for 



Latin and Greek — in which I did very well. And this is what saved me."" Charles 
Baudelaire, Vers latins, ed. Jules Mouquet (Paris, 1933), pp. 17, 18, 26. [J18,5] 

According to <Josephin> Peladan, "Theorie plastique de l'androgyne" (Mercure 
de France, 21 [1910], p. 650), the androgyne appears in Rossetti and Burne- 
Jones. [J18,6] 

Ernest Seilliere, Baudelaire (Paris, 1931), p. 262, on "the death of artists": "Re- 
reading his work, I tell myself that, were he making his debut as a writer now, not 
only would he not be singled out for distinction, hut he would be judged mal- 
adroit." [J18,7] 

Seilliere refers to the story "La Fanfarlo" as a document whose importance for 
Baudelaire's biography has not been sufficiently recognized <Baudelaire, p. 72>. 

[J18.8] 

"Baudelaire will keep to the end this intermittent awkwardness which was so 
foreign to the dazzling technique of a Hugo." Ernest Seilliere, Baudelaire, p. 72. 

[J18a,l] 

Key passages on the unsuitability of passion in art: the second preface to Poe, the 
study of Gautier. 94 [J18a,2] 

The first lecture in Brussels was concerned with Gautier. Camdle Lemonnier com- 
pares it to a Mass celebrated in honor of the master. Baudelaire is said to have 
displayed, on this occasion, "the grave beauty of a cardinal of letters officiating at 
the altar of the Ideal." Cited in Seilliere, Baudelaire (Paris, 1931), p. 123. 

[J18a,3] 

"In the drawing room on t he Place Royale, Baudelaire had himself introduced as 
a fervent disciple but . . . Hugo, ordinarily so skillful in sending away his visitors 
happy, did not understand the artificialiste character and t he exclusively Parisian 
predilections of the young man. . . . Their relations nonetheless remained cordial, 
Hugo having evidently not read the 'Salon de 1846'; and, in his 'Reflexions sur 
quelques-uns de mes contemporains' (Reflections on Some of My Contemporar- 
ies), Baudelaire showed himself very admiring, even rather perceptive, if without 
great profundity." Ernest Seilliere, Baudelaire (Paris, 1931), p. 129. [J18a,4] 

Baudelaire, reports Seilliere (p. 129), is supposed to have enjoyed strolling often 
along the Canal de l'Ourcq. [ J18a,5] 

About the Dufays — Baudelaire's forehears on his mother's side — nothing is 
known. [J18a,6] 



"In 1876, in an article entitled 'Chez feu mon maitrc' <At the Home of My Late 
Mentor>, Cladel would evoke . . . the macabre trait in the physiognomy of the poet. 



Never, according to this witness, . . . was he more forbidding than when he wanted 
to appear jovial; his voice took on a disquieting edge, while his vis comica made 
one shudder. On the pretext of exorcizing the evil spirits of his auditors, and with 
bursts of laughter piercing as sobs, he told them outrageous tales of trysts beyond 
the grave which froze the blood in their veins." Ernest Seilliere, Baudelaire 
(Paris, 1931), p. 150. [J18a,7] 

Where in Ovid is the passage in which it is said that the human face was made to 
mirror the stars? 35 [ J18a,8] 

Seilliere notes that the poems attributed apocryphally to Baudelaire were all 
necrophilic in character (p. 152). [ J18a,9] 

"Finally, as we know, the passional anomaly has a place in the art of Baudelaire, at 
least under one of its aspects, that of Lesbos; the other has not yet been made 
admissible by the progress of moral naturism." Ernest Seilliere, Baudelaire 
(Paris, 1931), p. 154. [ J18a,10] 

The sonnet "Quant a moi, si j'avais un beau pare plante d'if s" <As for me, if only 
I had a fine park, planted with yews>, 96 which Baudelaire apparently addressed to 
a young lady of Lyons some time around 1839-1840, is reminiscent, in its closing 
line — "And you know that too, my beauty, whose eyes are too shrewd" — of the 
last line of "A Une Passante." [ J 1 9 , 1 ] 

The piece "Vocations," in Spleen de Paris, is of great interest — particularly the 
account of the third child, who "lowered his voice: 'It certainly gives you a funny 
feeling not to be sleeping aJone, and to be in bed with your nurse, and in the 
dark. ... If you ever get the chance, try to do the same — you'll see!' / While he 
was talking, the eyes of the young author of this revelation had widened with a 
sort of stupefaction at what he was still feeling, and the light of the setting sun 
playing in his untidy red curls seemed to be lighting up a sulfurous aureole of 
passion." 97 The passage is as notable for Baudelaire's conception of the sinful as 
for the aura of public confessio. [J19,2] 

Baudelaire to his mother on January 11, 1858 (cited in Charles Baudelaire, Vers 
latins, ed. Mouquet [Paris, 1933], p. 130): "You haven't noticed that in Les Fleurs 
du mal there are two poems concerning you, or at least alluding to intimate details 
of our former life, going back to that time of your widowhood which left me with 
such strange and sad memories — one: 'Je n'ai pas oublie, voisine de la ville' 
(Neuilly), and the other, which follows it: 'La servante au grand coeur dont 
v«us etiez jalouse' (Mariette)? I left these poems without titles and without any 
further clarification, because I have a horror of prostituting intimate family 
matters " ,J11 [J19.3] 



Leconte cle Lisle's opinion that Baudelaire must have composed his poems by 
versifying a prose draft is taken up by Pierre Louys, Oeuvres completes, vol. 12 
(Paris, 1930), p. liii ("Suite a poetique"). Jules Mouquet comments on this view in 
Charles Baudelaire, Vers latins, introduction and notes by Jules Mouquet (Paris, 
1933), p. 131: "Leconte de Lisle and Pierre Louys, carried away by their antipa- 
thy to the Christian poet of Les Fleurs du mal, deny that he had any poetic 
gift! — Now, according to the testimony of friends of his youth, Baudelaire had 
started out by writing thousands of lines of fluent verse 'on any and every subject,' 
which he could hardly have done without 'thinking in verse.' He deliberately 
reined in this facility when . . . , at about the age of twenty-two, he began to write 
the poems which he entitled first Les Lesbiennes, then Les Limbes .... The Petits 
Poemes en prose . . . , in which the poet returns to themes he had already treated 
in verse, were composed at least ten years after Les Fleurs du mal. That Baude- 
laire had difficulty fashioning verse is a legend which he himself perhaps . . . 
helped spread." [J19.4] 

According to Raymond Trial, in La Maladie de Baudelaire (Paris, 1926), p. 20, 
recent research has shown that hereditary syphilis and acquired syphilis are not 
mutually exclusive. Thus, in Baudelaire's case, acquired syphilis would have 
joined with the hereditary strain transmitted by the father and manifest through 
hemiplegia in hoth sons and in his wife. [ J19a,l] 

Baudelaire, 1846: "If ever your flaneur's curiosity has landed you in a street 
hrawl, perhaps you will have felt the same delight as I have often felt to see a 
protector of the public's slumbers — a policeman or a municipal guard (the real 
army) — thumping a republican. And if so, like me, you will have said in your 
heart: 'Thump on, thump a little harder. . . . The man whom thou thumpest is an 
enemy of roses and of perfumes, and a maniac for utensils. He is the enemy of 
Watteau, the enemy of Raphael. " <, ' f Cited in R. Trial, La Maladie de Baudelaire 
(Paris, 1926), p. 51. [J19a,2] 

"Speak neither of opium nor of Jeanne Duval if you would criticize Les Fleurs du 
mal." Gilhert Maire, "La Personnalite de Baudelaire," Mercure de France, 21 
(January 16, 1910), p. 244. [J19a,3] 

"To conceive Baudelaire without recourse t o his hiography — this is the fundamen- 
tal object and final goal of our undertaking." Gilbert Maire, "La Personnalite de 
Baudelaire," Mercure de France, 21 (January 16, 1910), p. 244. [ J19a,4] 

"Jacques Crepet would like us to look on Baudelaire in such a way that the sincer- 
ity of his life would assure us of the value of his work, and that, sympathizing with 
the man, we would learn to love hoth life and work." Gilbert Maire, "La Person- 
nalite de Baudelaire," Mercure de France, 21 (Fehruary 1, 1910), p. 414. 

[J19a,5] 



Maire writes (p. 417) that the "incomparable sensibility" of Barres was schooled 
on Baudelaire. [J19a,6] 



To Ancelle, 1865: "One can both possess a unique genius and be a fool. Victor 
Hugo has given us ample proof of that. . . . The Ocean itself tired of his com- 
pany." 1 " 1 [J19a,7] 

Poe: "T would not be able to love,' he will say quite clearly, 'did not death mix its 
breath with that of Beauty!" 101 Cited in Ernest Seilliere, Baudelaire (Paris, 1931), 
p. 229. The author refers to the time when, after the death of Mrs. Jane Stanard, 
the iifteen-year-old Poe would spend long nights in the graveyard, often in the 
rain, at the site of her grave. [J19a,8] 

Baudelaire to his mother, concerning Les Fleurs du mal: "This book . . . possesses 
... a beauty that is sinister and cold: it was created with fury and patience." 1112 

[J19a,9] 

Letter from Ange Pechmeja to Baudelaire, February 1866. The writer expresses 
his admiration, in particular, for the sensuous interfusion in the poet's language. 
Sec Ernest Seilliere, Baudelaire (Paris, 1933), pp. 254-255. [ J19a,10] 

Baudelaire ascribes to Hugo an "interrogative" poetic character. [J20,l] 

There is probably a connection between Baudelaire's weakness of will and the 
abundance of power with which certain drugs under certain conditions endow 
the will. "Architecte de mes feeries / Je faisais, a ma volonte, / Sous un tunnel de 
pierreries / Passer un ocean dompte." 103 [ J20.2] 

Baudelaire's inner experiences: "Commentators have somewhat falsified the situ- 
ation ... in insisting overmuch on the theory of universal analogy, as formulated 
in the sonnet 'Correspondances,' while ignoring the reverie to which Baudelaire 
was inclined. . . . There were moments of depersonalization in his existence, mo- 
ments of self -forgetting and of communication with 'revealed paradises.' ... At 
the end of his life . . . , he abjured the dream, . . . blaming his moral shipwreck on 
his 'penchant for reverie.'" Albert Beguin, L'Ame romantique et le rive (Mar- 
seilles, 1937), vol. 2, pp. 401, 405. [ J20,3] 

In his hook Le Parnasse, Therive points to the decisive influence of painting and 
the graphic arts on a great many of Baudelaire's poems. He sees in this a charac- 
teristic feature of the Parnassian school. Moreover, he sees Baudelaire's poetry as 
an interpenetration of Parnassian and Symbolist tendencies. [ J20,4] 

"A propensity to imagine even nature through the vision that others have had of it. 
'La Geante' comes out of Michelangelo; 'Reve parisien,' out of Simone Martini; 'A 



Une Madone' is a Baroque statue in a Spanish chapel." Andre Therive, Le Par- 
nasse (Paris, 1929), p. 101. [J20,5] 



Therive finds in Baudelaire "certain gaucheries, which, today, one can't help 
thinking might be traits of the sublime." Andre Therive, Le Parnasse (Paris, 
1929), p. 99. [J20.6] 

In an article entitled "Une Anecdote controuvee sur Baudelaire" <A Fabricated 
Anecdote about Baudelaire), in the Fortnightly Review section of the Mercure de 
France (May 15, 1921), Baudelaire's alleged sojourn and activity with a conserva- 
tive newspaper in Chateauroux is disputed by Ernest Gaubert, who examined all 
the periodicals from the town, and who traces the anecdote back to A. Ponroy (a 
friend of Baudelaire's who had family in Chateauroux), from whom Crepet got it. 
Mercure de France, 148, pp. 281-282. [ J20.7] 

Daudet, in an inspired phrase, speaks of Baudelaire's "trap-door disposition — 
which is also that of Prince Hamlet." Leon Daudet, Les Pelerins d 'Emrmils (Cour- 
rier des Pays-Bas, 4) (Paris <1928>), p. 101 ("Baudelaire: Le Malaise et l'aura'"). 

[J20,8] 

"Theme . . . of . . . the affirmation of a mysterious presence at the back of things, 
as in the depths of the soul — the presence of Eternity. Hence the obsession with 
timepieces, and the need to break out of the confines of one's own life through the 
immense prolongation of ancestral memory and of former lives." Albert Beguin, 
L'Ame romantique et le reve (Marseilles, 1937), vol. 2, p. 403. [J20a,l] 

Roger Allard in a polemic against the introduction to L'Oeuvre poetique de 
Charles Baudelaire-, edited by Guillaume Apollinaire (Paris: Bibliotheque des 
Curieux). In this introduction, Apollinaire advances the thesis that Baudelaire, 
while inaugurating the modern spirit, played little part in its development; his 
influence is nearly spent. Baudelaire is said to be a cross between Laclos and Poe. 
Allard replies: "In our view, two writers profoundly influenced Baudelaire, or 
rather two books. . . . One is . . . Le Diable amoureux <The Devil in Love>, hy 
Cazotte; the other, Diderot's La Religieuse <The Nun). Two notes at this point: 
"(1) M. Apollinaire could not do otherwise than name the author of Le Diable 
amoureux in a note concerning the last line of the sonnet 'Le Possede': 'One would 
prohably not go wrong in taking Cazotte as the hyphen that had the honor of 
uniting, in Baudelaire's mind, the spirit of the Revolution's writers with that of 
Edgar Poe.' (2) The poem accompanying a letter from Baudelaire to Sainte-Beuve 
can he found in the edition furnished by M. Apollinaire: '. . . with eyes darker and 
more hlue than the Nun whose / sad and ohscene story is known to all. . . . ,m A 
few lines later, we come upon the first draft of a stanza of 'Leshos. '" Roger Allard, 
Baudelaire et "V Esprit nou veau" (Paris, 1918), p. 10. [J20a,2] 



Leon Dauclet, in "Baudelaire: Le Malaise et Faura,'" asks whether Baudelaire did 
not in some degree play Hamlet opposite Aupick and his mother. [ J20a,3] 



Vigny wrote "Le Mont des oliviers" partly in order to refute de Maistre, by 
whom he was deeply influenced. [J20a,4] 

Jules Romains (Les Hommes de bonne volonte, book 2 , Crime de Quinette (Paris, 
1932>, p. 171) compares the flanenr to Baudelaire's "rugged swimmer reveling in 
the waves." 105 [J 20a, 5] 

Compare "the secret harvest of the heart" ("Le Soleil") with "Nothing ever 
grows, / once the heart is harvested" ("Semper eadem"). 106 These formulations 
have a bearing on Baudelaire's heightened artistic consciousness: the blossom 
makes the dilettante; the fruit, the master. [ J20a,6] 

The essay on Dupont was commissioned by Dupont's publisher. [J21 ,1] 

Poem to Sarah, around 1839. It contains this stanza: 

Though to get some shoes she sold her soul, 
The good Lord would laugh if with this wretch 
I struck a haughty pose like some Tartuffe, 

I who sell my thought and would he an author. 107 [J 21 ,2] 

"Le Mauvais Vitrier" — to be compared with Lafcadio's acte gratuit (gratuitous 
act>. 10S [J21,3] 

"When, your heart on fire with valor and with hope, 
you whipped the moneylenders out of that place — 
you were master then! But now, has not remorse 
pierced your side even deeper than the spear? 109 

That is, remorse at having let pass so fine an opportunity for proclaiming the 
dictatorship of the proletariat!" Thus inanely comments Seilliere {^Baudelaire 
[Paris, 1933],> p. 193) on "Le Reniement de Saint Pierre." [J2 1,4] 

Apropos these lines from "Lesbos" — "Of Sappho who died on the day of her 
blasphemy, / . . . insulting the rite and the designated worship" 110 — Seilliere 
(p. 216) remarks: "It is not hard to see that the 'god,' the object of this 'august' 
religion, whose practice consists in blaspheming and in insulting traditional rites, 
is none other than Satan." Isn't the blasphemy, in this case, the love for a young 
man? [J21,5] 

From the obituary notice, "Charles Baudelaire," by Jules Valles, which appeared 
September 7, 1867, in La Rue: "Will he have ten years of immortality?" (p. 190). 
"These are, moreover, bad times for the biblicists of the sacristy or of the cabaret! 



Ours is an age of gaiety and distrust, one that never long suspends the recital of 
nightmares or the spectacle of ecstasies. It has now become clear that no one else 
had enough foresight to undertake such a campaign at the period when Baude- 
laire began his" (pp. 190-191). "Why didn't he become a professor of rhetoric or 
a dealer in scapulars, this didactician who imitated the blasted and downtrodden, 
this classicist who wanted to shock Pradhomme, but who, as Dusolier has said, 
was only a hysterical Boileau who went to play Dante among the cafes" (p. 192). 
Notwithstanding the resounding error in its appreciation of the importance of 
Baudelaire's work, the obituary contains some perceptive passages, particularly 
those concerned with the habitus of Baudelaire: "He had in him something of the 
priest, the old lady, and the ham actor. Above all, the ham actor" (p. 189). The 
piece is reprinted in Andre Billy, Les Ecrivains de combat (Paris, 1931); originally 
appeared in La Situation. [ J21,6] 

Key passages on the stars in Baudelaire (ed. Le Dantec) : "Night! you'd please me 
more without these stars / which speak a language I know all too well — / 1 long 
for darkness, silence, nothing there . . ." ("Obsession," <vol. 1,> p. 88). — Ending of 
"Les Promesses d'un visage" (<vol. 1,> p. 170): the "enormous head of hair — / 
. . . which in darkness rivals you, O Night, / deep and spreading starless 
Night!" — "Yet neither sun nor moon appeared, / and no horizon paled" ("Reve 
parisien," <vol. 1,> p. 116). — "What if the waves and winds are black as ink" ("Le 
Voyage," <vol. 1,> p. 149). — Compare, however, "Les Yeux de Berthe," the only 
weighty exception (<vol. 1,> p. 169), and, in another perspective, the constellation 
of the stars with the aether, as it appears in "Delphine et Hippolyte" (<vol. 1,> 
p. 160) and in "Le Voyage" (<vol. 1,> p. 146 <sec. 3>). On the other hand, highly 
characteristic that "Le Crepuscule du soir" makes no mention of stars. 111 [J21a,l] 

"Le Mort joyeux" could represent a reply to Poe's fantasies of decomposition: 
"and let me know if one last twinge is left. . . ."" 2 [J21a,2] 

A sardonic accent marks the spot where it is said of the stars: "decent planets, at 
a time like this, / renounce their vigilance — " ("Sepulture")." 3 [J21a,3] 

Baudelaire introduces into the lyric the figure of sexual perversion that seeks its 
objects on the street. What is most characteristic, however, is that he does this 
with the phrase "trembling like a fool" in one of his most perfect love poems, "A 
Une Passante."" 1 [J21a,4] 

Figure of the big city whose inhabitants are frightened of cathedrals: "Vast 
woods, you terrify me like cathedrals" ("Obsession")." 5 [J21a,5] 



"Le Voyage" (sec. 7): "Come and revel in the sweet delight / of days where it is 
always afternoon!" 115 Is it too bold to see in the emphasis on this time of day 
something peculiar to the big city? [J21a,6] 



The hidden figure that is the key to "Le Balcon": the night which holds the lovers 
in its embrace as, after day's departure, they dream of the dawn, is starless — 
"The night solidified into a wall." 117 [J2 la, 7] 



To the glance that encounters the "Passante" contrast George's poem "Von einer 
Begegnung" <Encounter>: 

My glances drew me from the path I seek 

And crazed with magic, mad to clasp, they trailed 
The slender bow sweet limbs in walking curved, 
And wet with longing then, they fell and failed 
Before into your own they boldly swerved. 

Stefan George, Hymnen; Pilgerfkhrten; Algabal (Berlin, 1922), pp. 22-23. 118 

[J22.1] 



"'The unexampled ogle of a whore / glinting toward you like a silver ray / the 
wavering moon releases on the lake':" 9 so begins the last poem. And into this 
extraordinary stare, which brings uncontrollable tears to the eyes of him who 
meets it without defenses, Berg looked long and avidly. For him, however, as for 
Baudelaire, the mercenary eye became a legacy of the prehistoric world. The 
arc-light moon of the big city shines for him like something out of the age of 
hetaerism. He needs only to have it reflected, as on a lake, and the banal reveals 
itself as the distant past; the nineteenth-century commodity betrays its mythic 
taboo. It was in such a spirit that Berg composed Lulu." Wiesengrund-Adorno, 
"Konzertarie 'Der Wein,'" in Willi Reich, Alban Berg, with Berg's own writings 
and with contributions by Theodor Wiesengrund-Adorno and Ernst Krenek (Vi- 
enna, Leipzig, Zurich <1937>), p. 106. [J22,2] 

What's with the dilation of the sky in Meryon's engraving? [ J22,3] 

"Le Crepuscule du matin" occupies a crucial position in Le s Flews du mal. The 
morning wind disperses the clouds of myth. Human beings and their affairs are 
exposed to view. The prerevolutionary dawn glimmers in this poem. (In fact, it 
was probably composed after 1850.) [ J22,4] 

The antithesis between allegory and myth has to be clearly developed. It was 
owing to the genius of allegory that Baudelaire did not succumb to the abyss of 
myth that gaped beneath his feet at every step. [J22,5] 



'"The depths being the multitudes,' Victor Hugo's solitude becomes a solitude 
overrun, a swarming solitude." Gabriel Bounoure, "Abimes de Victor Hugo," 
Mesures, (July 15, 1936), p. 39. The author underscores the element of passivity 
in Hugo's experience of the crowd. [J22,6] 



"Nachtgedanken" <Night Thoughts>, by Goethe: "I pity you, unhappy stars, / who 
are so beautiful and shine so splendidly, / gladly guiding the struggling sailor with 
your light, / and yet have no reward from gods or men: / for you do not love, you 
have never known love! / Ceaselessly by everlasting hours / your dance is led 
across the wide heavens. / How vast a journey you have made already / since I, 
reposing in my sweetheart's arms, / forgot my thoughts of you and of the mid- 



The following argument — which dates from a period in which the decline of 
sculpture had become apparent, evidently prior to the decline of painting — is 
very instructive. Baudelaire makes exactly the same point about sculpture from 
the perspective of painting as is made today about painting from the perspective 
of film. "A picture, however, is only what it wants to be; there is no other way of 
looking at it than on its own terms. Painting has but one point of view; it is 
exclusive and absolute, and therefore the painter's expression is much more 
forceful." Baudelaire, Oeuvres, vol. 2, p. 128 ("Salon de 1846"). Just before this 
(pp. 127-128): "The spectator who moves around the figure can choose a hun- 
dred different points of view, except the right one." i2l <Compare> J4,7 [J22a,2] 

On Victor Hugo, around 1840: "At that same period, he began to realize that if 
man is the solitary animal, the solitary man is a man of the crowds [p. 39]. ... It 
was Victor Hugo who gave Baudelaire that sense of the irradiant life of the crowd, 
and who taught him that 'multitude and solitude [are] equal and interchangeable 
terms for the poet who is active and productive. . . .' l22 Nevertheless, what a dif- 
ference between the solitude which the great artist of spleen chose for himself in 
Brussels in order 'to gain an inalienable individual tranquillity' and the solitude of 
the magus of Jersey, haunted at that same moment by shadowy apparitions! . . . 
Hugo's solitude is not an envelope, a Noli me tangere, a concentration of the 
individual in his difference. It is, rather, a participation in the cosmic mystery, an 
entry into the realm of primitive forces" (pp. 40-41). Gabriel Bounoure, "Ahlmes 



From Le Collier des jours <The Necklace of Days>, vol. 1, cited hy Remy de Gour- 
mont in Judith Gautier (Paris, 1904), p. 15: "A ring of the hell interrupted us and 
then, without a sound, a very singular person entered the room and made a slight 
how of the head. I had the impression of a priest without his cassock. 'Ah, here's 
Baldelarius!' cried my father, extending his hand to the newcomer." Baudelaire 
of fers a gloomy jest on the subject of Judith's nickname, "Ouragan" <IIurricane>. 



"At the cafe called the Divan Le Peletier, Theodore de Banville would see Baude- 
laire sitting liercely, 'like an angry Goethe' (as he says in a poem), next to 'the 
gentle Asselineau.'" Leon Daudet, Le Stupide XIX' Siecle (Paris, 1922), pp. 139- 



night!" 120 



[J22a,l] 



de Victor Hugo," Mesures (July 15, 1936), pp. 39-41. 



[J22a,3] 



[J23,l] 



140. 



[J23.2] 



Apropos of "The greathearted servant ..." and the end of "Le Voyage" ("• 
Death, old captain . . ."), L. Daudet speaks of a Ronsardian flight (in Le Stupide 
XIX" Siecle, p. 140). [J23,3] 



"My father had caught a glimpse of Baudelaire, and he told me about his impres- 
sion: a bizarre and atrabilious prince among boors." Leon Daudet, Le Stupide 
XIX" Siecle (Paris, 1922), p. 141. [J23,4] 

Baudelaire calls Hugo a "genius without borders." 123 [J23,5] 

It is presumably no accident that, in searching for a poem by Hugo to provide 
with a pendant, Baudelaire fastened on one of the most banal of the banal — "Les 
Fantomes." In this sequence of six poems, the first begins: "How many maidens 
fair, alas! I've seen /Fade and die." The third: "One form above all, — 'twas a 
Spanish maid." And further on: "What caused her death? Balls, dances — daz- 
zling balls; / They filled her soul with ecstasy and joy." This is followed by the 
story of how she caught cold one morning, and eventually sank into the grave. 
The sixth poem resembles the close of a popular ballad: "O maidens, whom such 
festive fetes decay! / Ponder the story of this Spanish maid." 12 * [ J23,6] 

With Baudelaire's "La Voix" <The Voice> compare Victor Hugo's "Ce qu'on 
entend sur la montagne" <What Is Heard on the Mountain). The poet gives ear 
to the world storm: 

Soon with that voice confusedly combined, 
Two other voices, vague and veiled, I find. 

And seemed each voice, though mixed, distinct to be, 
As two cross-currents 'neath a stream you see. 

One from the seas — triumphant, blissful song! 
\foice of the waves, which talked themselves among; 
The other, which from the earth to heaven ran, 
Was full of sorrow — the complaint of man. 

The poem takes, as its object, the dissonance of the second voice, which is set off 
against the harmony of the first. Ending: 

Why God... 

Joins in the fatal hymn since earth began, 

The song of Nature, and the cries of man? 125 [ J23,7] 

Isolated observations from Barbey d'Aurevilly's "M. Charles Baudelaire": "I 
sometimes imagine . . . that, if Timon of Athens had had the genius of Archilochus, 
he would have been able to write in this manner on human nature and to insult it 
while rendering it!" (p. 381). "Conceive, if you will, a language more plastic than 
poetic, a language hewn and shaped like hronze and stone, in which each phrase 
has its volutes and fluting" (p. 378). "This profound dreamer . . . asked himself 



, . . what would become of poetry in passing through a head organized, for exam- 
ple, like that of Caligula or Heliogabalus" (p. 376). — "Thus, like the old Goethe 
who transformed himself into a seller of Turkish pastilles in his Divan . . . , the 
author of Les Fleurs du mal turned villainous, blasphemous, impious for the sake 
of his thought" (pp. 375-376). < Jules> Barbey cl'Aurevilly, XIX Siecle: Les Oeu- 
vres et les homines, vol. 3, Les Poetes (Paris, 1862). [ J23a,l] 



"A critic (M. Thierry, in Le Moniteur) made the point recently in a very fine 
appreciation: to discover the parentage of this implacable poetry . . . one must go 
back to Dante . . . !" (p. 379). This analogy Barbey makes emphatically his own: 
"Dante's muse looked dreamily on the Inferno; that of Les Fleurs du mal breathes 
it in through inflamed nostrils, as a horse inhales shrapnel" (p. 380). Barbey 
d'Aurevilly, XIX C Siecle: Les Oeuvres et les hommes, vol. 3, Les Poetes (Paris, 
1862). [J23a,2] 



Barbey d'Aurevilly on Dupont: "Cain triumphs over the gentle Abel in this man's 
talent and thinking — the Cain who is coarse, ravenous, envious, and fierce, and 
who has gone to the cities to consume the dregs of accumulated resentments and 
share in the false ideas that triumph there!" Barbey d'Aurevilly, Le XIX" Siecle: 
Les Oeuvres et les hmmmes, vol. 3, Les Poetes (Paris, 1862), p. 242 ("M. Pierre 
Dupont"). [J23a,3] 



A manuscript of Goethe's "Nachtgedanken" bears the notation, "Modeled on the 
Greek." [J23a,4] 

At the age of eleven, Baudelaire experienced first hand the workers' rebellion of 
1832 in Lyons. It appears that no trace remained in bim of any impressions that 
event might have left. [ J23a,5] 



"One of the arguments he makes to his guardian, Ancelle, is rather curious. It 
seems to him that 'the new Napoleonic regime, after illustrations depicting the 
battlefield, ought to seek illustrations depicting the arts and letters. "' Alphonse 
Seche, La Vie des Fleurs du mal (Paris, 1928), p. 172. [ J23a,6] 

The sense of "the abyssal" is to be defined as "meaning." Such a sense is always 
allegorical. [J24,l] 

With Blanqui, the cosmos has become an abyss. Baudelaire's abyss is starless; it 
should not be defined as cosmic space. But even less is it the exotic space of 
theology. It is a secularized space: the abyss of knowledge and of meanings. 
What constitutes its historical index? In Blanqui, the abyss has the historical 
index of mechanistic natural science. In Baudelaire, doesn't it have the social 
index of nouveaute? Is not the arbitrariness of allegory a twin to that of fashion? 

[J24,2] 



Explore the question whether a connection exists between the works of the 
allegorical imagination and the correspondances. In any case, these are two wholly 
distinct sources for Baudelaire's production. That the first of them has a very 
considerable share in the specific qualities of his poetry caimot be doubted. The 
nexus of meanings might be akin to that of the fibers of spun yarn. If we can 
distinguish between spinning and weaving activity in poets, then the allegorical 
imagination must be classed with the former. — On the other hand, it is not 
impossible that the correspondences play at least some role here, insofar as a 
word, in its way, calls forth an image; thus, the image could determine the 
meaning of the word, or else the word that of the image. [ J24,3] 

Disappearance of allegory in Victor Hugo. [ J24,4] 

Do flowers lack souls? Is this an implication of the title LesFleurs du mal?ln other 
words, are flowers a symbol of the whore? Or is tliis title meant to recall flowers 
to their true place? Pertinent here is the letter accompanying the two crepuscule 
<twilight> poems wliich Baudelaire sent to Fernand Desnoyers for his Fontaine- 
bleau: Paysages, legendes, souvenirs, fantairies (1855). <See below, 24a, l.> [J24.5] 

Utter detachment of Poe from great poetry. For one Fouque, he would give fifty 
Molieres. The Iliad and Sophocles leave him cold. This perspective would accord 
perfectly with the theory oll'art pour I'art. What was Baudelaire's attitude? 

[J24.6] 

With the mailing of the "Crepuscules" to Fernand Desnoyers for his Fontaine- 
bleau (Paris, 1855): "My dear Desnoyers: You ask me for some verses for your 
little anthology, verses about Nature, I believe; about forests, great oak trees, 
verdure, insects — and perhaps even the sun? But you know perfectly well that I 
can't become sentimental about vegetation and that my soul rebels against this 
strange new religion. ... I shall never believe that the souls of the gods live in 
plants .... I have always thought, even, that there was something irritating and 
impudent about Nature in its fresh and rampant state." 126 Cited in A. Seche, La 
Vie des Fleurs du mal <Amiens, 1928>, pp. 109-110. [J24a,l] 

"Les Aveugles" <Blind Men>: Crepet gives as source for this poem of Baudelaire's 
a passage from "Des Vetters Eckfenster" <My Cousin's Corner Window> — a 
passage about the way blind people hold their heads. Hoffmann considers the 
heavenward gaze to be edifying. <See T4a,2.> [ J24a,2] 

Louis Goudall criticized Baudelaire on November 4, 1855, on the basis of poems 
published in La Revue des deux mondes. "Poetry that is . . . nauseating, glacial, 
straight from the charnel house and the slaughterhouse." Cited in Francois Por- 
che, La Vie doulou.reu.se de Charles Baudelaire (series entitled Le Roman des 
grandes existences, vol. 6) (Paris <1926>), p. 202. [J24a,3] 



The reviews by <Barbey> d' Aurevilly and Asselineau were turned down by Le Pays 
and La Revue frangaise, respectively. [J24a,4] 



The famous statement by Valery on Baudelaire <seejl,l> goes back, in essence, 
to the suggestions Sainte-Beuve sent to Baudelaire for his courtroom defense. "In 
the 6eld of poetry, everything was taken. Lamartine had taken the skies. Victor 
Hugo, the earth— and more than the earth. Laprade, the forests. Musset, the 
dazzling life of passion and orgy. Others, the hearth, rural life, and so on. Theo- 
phile Gautier, Spain and its vibrant colors. What then remained? What Baude- 
laire has taken. It was as though he had no choice in the matter. . . ." Cited in 
Porche, La Vie douloureuse de Charles Baudelaire <Paris, 1926>, p. 205. [ J24a,5] 

Very plausible indication in Porche to the effect that Baudelaire did not produce 
the many decisive variants to his poems while seated at his desk. (See Porche, 
p. 109.) [J24a,6] 

"Finding the poet one evening at a public ball, Charles Monselet accosted him: 
'What are you doing here?' — 'My dear fellow,' replied Baudelaire, 'I'm watching 
the death's heads pass!'" Alphonse Seche, La Vie des Fleurs du mal (<Amiens,> 
1928), p. 32. [J25.1] 

' 4 IIis earnings have been reckoned: the total for his entire life does not exceed 
sixteen thousand francs. Catulle Mendes calculated that the author . . . would 
have received about one franc seventy centimes per day as payment for his literary 
labors." Alphonse Seche, La Vie des Fleurs du mal (< Amiens,) 1928), p. 34. 

[J25.2] 

According to Seche, Baudelaire's aversion to a sky that was "much too blue" — or 
rather, much too bright — would have come from his stay on the island of Mauri- 
tius. (See Seche, p . 42.) [ J25.3] 

Seche speaks of a pronounced similarity between Baudelaire's letters to Mile. 
Daubrun and his letters to Mme. Sabatier. (See p. 53.) [J25,4] 

According to Seche (p. 65), Champfleury would have taken part with Baudelaire 
in the founding of Le Salut public. [ J25.5] 

Prarond on the period around 1845: ' l We understood little of the use of tables for 
working, thinking, composing. . . . For my part, I saw him composing verses on 
the run while he was out in the streets; I never saw him seated before a ream of 
paper." Cited in Seche, La Vie des Fleurs du mal (1928), p. 84. [J25,6] 



The way Baudelaire presented himself during his Brussels lecture on Gautier, as 
described by Camille Lemonnier in La Vie beige: "Baudelaire made one think of a 
man of the church, with those beautiful gestures of the pulpit. His soft linen cuffs 



fluttered like the sleeves of a clerical frock. He developed his subject with an 
almost evangelical unctuousness, proclaiming his veneration for a literary master 
in the liturgical tones of a bishop announcing a mandate. To himself, no doubt, he 
was celebrating a Mass full of glorious images; he had the grave beauty of a cardi- 
nal of letters officiating at the altar of the Ideal. His smooth, pale visage was 
shaded in the halftone of the lamplight. I watched his eyes move like black suns. 
His mouth had a life of its own within the life and expressions of his face; it was 
thin and quivering with a delicate vibrancy under the drawn bow of his words. 
And from its haughty height the head commanded the attention of the intimidated 
audience." Cited in Seche, La Vie des Fleurs du mal (1928), p. 68. [J25.7] 

Baudelaire transferred his application for the playwright Scribe's seat in the 
Academie Fran$aise to that of the Catholic priest Lacordaire. [J25a,l] 

Gautier: "Baudelaire loves ample polysyllabic words, and with three or four of 
these words he sometimes fashions lines of verse that seem immense, lines that 
resonate in such a way as to lengthen the meter." Cited in A. Seche, La Vie des 
Fleurs du mal (<Amiens,> 1928), p. 195. [J25a,2] 

Gautier: "To the extent that it was possihle, he banished eloquence in poetry." 
Cited in A. Seche, La Vie des Fleurs du mal (1928), p. 197. [ J25a,3] 

E. Faguet in an article in La Revue: "Since 1857, the neurasthenia among us has 
scarcely abated; one could even say that i t has been on the rise. Hence, 'there is no 
cause for wonder,' as Ronsard once said, that Baudelaire still has his follow- 
ers. ..." Cited in Alphonse Seche, La Vie des Fleurs du mal (1928), p. 207. 

[J25a,4] 

Le Figaro publishes (date?) an article by GustaveBourdin that was written at the 
instigation of Interior Minister Billaut. The latter had shortly before, as judge or 
public prosecutor, suffered a setback with the acquittal of Flaubert in the trial 
against Madame Bovary. A few days later came Thierry's article in Le Moniteur. 
"Why did Sainte-Beuve . . . leave it to Thierry to tell readers of Le Moniteur about 
Les Fleurs du mal? Sainte-Beuve doubtless refused to write about Baudelaire's 
book because he deemed it more prudent to efface the ill effect his article on 
Madame Bovary had had in the inner circles of the government." Alphonse Seche, 
La Vie des Fleurs du mal (1928), pp. 156-157. 127 [ J25a,5] 

The denunciation in Bourdin's article is treacherously disguised as praise for 
precisely those poems singled out in the indictment. After a disgusted enumera- 
tion of Baudelaire's topics, he writes: "And in the middle of it all, four poems — 'Le 
Reniement de Saint Pierre,' then 'Lesbos,' and two entitled 'Fenunes danmees' — 
four masterpieces of passion, of art, and of poetry. It is understandable that a poet 
of twenty might be led by his imagination to treat these subjects, but nothing 



excuses a man over thirty who foists such monstrosities on the public by means 
of a book." Cited in Alphonse Seche, La Vie des Fleurs du mal (1928), p. 158. 

[J25a,6] 

From Edouard Thierry's review of Les Fleurs du mal in Le Moniteur (July 14, 
1857?): "The Florentine of old would surely recognize, in this French poet of 
today, the characteristic ardor, the terrifying utterance, the ruthless imagery, and 
the sonority of his brazen lines. ... I leave his book and his talent under Dante's 
stern warning." 128 Cited in Alphonse Seche, Le Vie des Fleurs du mal (1928), 
pp. 160-161. [J26.1] 

Baudelaire's great dissatisfaction with the frontispiece designed by Bracquemond 
according to specifications provided by the poet, who had conceived this idea 
while perusing Hyacinthe Langlois' Hutoire des danses macabre s. Baudelaire's 
instructions: "A skeleton turning into a tree, with legs and ribs forming the trunk, 
the arms stretched out to make a cross and bursting into leaves and buds, shelter- 
ing several rows of poisonous plants in little pots, lined up as if in a gardener's 
hothouse." <SeeJ16,3.> Bracquemond evidently runs into difficulties, and more- 
over misses the poet's intention when he masks the skeleton's pelvis with flowers 
and fails to give its arms the form of branches. From what Baudelaire has said, 
the artist simply does not know what a squelette arborescent is supposed to be, and 
he can't conceive how vices are supposed to be represented as flowers. (Cited in 
Alphonse Seche, La Vie des Fleurs du mal [<Amiens,> 1928], pp. 136-137, as 
drawn from letters.) In the end, a portrait of the poet by Bracquemond was 
substituted for this planned image. Something similar resurfaced around 1862, as 
Poulet-Malassis was planning a luxury edition of Les Fleurs du mal. He commis- 
sioned Bracquemond to do the graphic design, which apparently consisted of 
decorative borders and vignettes; emblematic devices played a major role on 
these. (See Seche, p. 138.) — The subject that Bracquemond had failed to render 
was taken up by Rops in the frontispiece to Les Epaves (1866). [J26.2] 

List of reviewers for Les Fleurs du mal, with the newspapers Baudelaire had in 
mind for them: Buloz, Lacaussade, Gustave Rouland (La Revue europeenne); 
Gozlan (Le Monde illustre); Sainte-Beuve (Le Moniteur); Deschanel (Le Journal 
des debuts); Aurevilly (Le Pays); Janin (Le ISord); Armand Fraisse (Le Salut 
public de Lyons); Guttinguer (La Gazette de France). (According to Seche, 
p. 140.) [J26.3] 

The publication rights for Baudelaire's entire oeuvre were auctioned after his 
death to Michel Levy for 1,750 francs. [J26.4] 



The "Tableaux Parisiens" appear only with the second edition of Le Fleurs du 
mal. [J26.5] 



The definitive title for the book was proposed by Hippolyte Babou in the Cafe 
Lamblin. [J26a,l] 



"L'Amour et le crane" <Eros and the Skulb. "This poem of Baudelaire's was 
inspired by two works of the engraver Henri Goltzius." Alphonse Seche, La Vie 
des Fleurs du mal (<Amiens,> 1928), p. 111. [J26a,2] 

"A line Passante." "M. Crepet mentions as possible source a passage from 'Dina, 
la belle Juive,' in Petrus Borel's Champavert . . . : 'For me, the thought that this 
lightning (lash that dazzled us will never be seen again . . . ; that two existences 
made . . . for happiness together, in this life and in eternity, are forever sun- 
dered . . . — forme, this thought is profoundly saddening.'" Cited in A. Seche, La 
Vie des Fleurs du mml, p. 108. [J26a,3] 

"Reve parisien." Like the speaker in the poem, Constantin Guys also rose at noon; 
hence, according to Baudelaire (letter of March 13, 1860, to Poulet-Malassis), the 
dedication. 129 [J26a,4] 

Baudelaire (where?) l:, ° points to the third book of the Aeneid as source for "Le 
Cygne." (See Seche, p. 104.) [J26a,5] 

To the right of the barricade; to the left of the barricade. It is very significant that, 
for large portions of the middle classes, there was only a shade of difference 
between these two positions. This changes only with Louis Napoleon. For 
Baudelaire it was possible (no easy trick!) to be friends with Pierre Dupont and to 
participate in the June Insurrection on the side of the proletariat, while avoiding 
any sort of run-in when he encountered his friends from the Ecole Norinande, 
Chennevieres and Le Vavasseur, in the company of a national guardsman. — It 
may be recalled, in this context, that the appointment of General Aupick as 
ambassador to Constantinople in 1848 goes back to Lamartine, who at that time 
was minister of foreign affairs. [ J26a,6] 

Work on Les Fleurs du malup through the first edition: fifteen years. [J26a,7] 

Proposal of a Brussels pharmacist to Poulet-Malassis: in exchange for a commit- 
ment to buy 200 copies, he would be allowed to advertise to readers, in the back 
pages of Les Paradis artificiels, a hashish extract prepared by his firm. Baude- 
laire's veto won out with difficulty. [ J26a,8] 

From <Barbey> d'Aurevilly's letter to Baudelaire of February 4, 1859: "Villain of 
genius! In poetry, I knew you to he a sacred viper spewing your venom in the faces 
of the g — s and the g — s. But now the viper has sprouted wings and is soaring 
through the clouds to shoot its poison into the very eyes of the Sun!" Cited in 
Ernest Seilliere, Baudelaire (Paris, 1931). p. 157. [ J27,l] 



In Honfleur, he had hung two paintings over his bed. One of them, painted by his 
father as pendant to the other, showed an amorous scene; the other, dating from 
an earlier time, a Temptation of Saint Anthony. In the center of the first picture, a 
bacchante. [J27,2] 

"Sand is inferior to Sade!" i:u [J27,3] 

"We ensure that our confessions are well rewarded" 132 — this should be compared 
with the practice of his letters. [ J27,4] 

Seilliere (p. 234) cites <Barbey> d'Aurevilly: "Ibe's hidden objective was to con- 
found the imagination of his times. . . . Hoffmann did not have this terrible 
power." Such puissance terrible was surely Baudelaire's as well. [J27,5] 

On Delacroix (according to Seilliere, p. 114): "Delacroix is the artist best 
equipped to portray modern woman in her heroic manifestations, whether these 
be understood in the divine or the infernal sense. ... It seems that such color 
thinks for itself, independently of the objects it clothes. The effect of the whole is 
almost musical." 133 [J27,6] 

Fourier is said to have presented his "minute discoveries" too "pompously." 13 ' 1 

[J27,7] 

Seilliere represents as his particular object of study what in general determines 
the standard for the literature on Baudelaire: "It is, in effect, the theoretical 
conclusions imposed on Charles Baudelaire by his life experiences that I am 
particularly concerned with in these pages." Ernest Seilliere, Baudelaire (Paris, 
1931), p. 1. ' [J27,8] 

Eccentric hehavior in 1848: '"They've just arrested de Flotte,' he said. 'Is it 
because his hands smelled of gunpowder? Smell mine!'" Seilliere, Baudelaire 
(Paris, 1931), p. 51. [J27,9] 

Seilliere (p. 59) righdy contrasts Baudelaire's postulate, according to which the 
advent of Napoleon III is to be interpreted in de Maistre's sense as "providen- 
tial," with his comment: "My rage at the coup d'etat. How many bullets I braved! 
Another Bonaparte! What a disgrace!" Both in "Mon Coeur mis a nu." m 

[J27a,l] 

The bookby Seilliere is thoroughly imbued with the position of its author, who is 
president of the Academie des Sciences Morales et Politiques. A typical premise: 
"The social question is a question of morality" (p. 66). Individual sentences by 
Baudelaire are invariably accompanied by the author's marginal glosses. 

[J27a,2] 



Bourdin: son-in-law of Villemessant. Le Figaro in 1863 publishes a violent attack 
by Pontmartin on Baudelaire. In 1864., he halts publication of the Petits Poemes en 
prose after two installments. Villemessant: "Your poems bore everybody." See 
Frangois Porche, La Vie douloureuse de Charles Baudelaire (series entitled Le 
Roman des grandes existences, vol. 6) (Paris <1926>), p. 261. [ J27a,3] 

On Lamartine: "A bit of a strumpet, a bit of a whore." Cited in Francois Porche, 
La Vie douloureuse de Charles Baudelaire (series entitled Le Roman des grandes 
existences, vol. 6) (Paris), p. 248. [ J27a,4] 

Relation to Victor Hugo: "He had solicited from him a preface to the study on 
Gautier, and, with the aim of forcing Victor Hugo's hand, had even dedicated some 
poems to him." Francois Porche, La Vie douloureuse de Charles Baudelaire (se- 
ries entitled Le Roman des grandes existences, vol. 6) (Paris), p. 251. [ J27a,5] 

Title of the first publication of pieces from Les Paradis artijiciels in La Revue 
contemporaine, 1858: "De l'ldeal artificiel" <0n the Artificial Ideab. [ J27a,6] 

Sainte-Beuve's article in Le Constitutional of January 20, 1862. Subsequently, 
as early as February 9 — as Baudelaire is toying with the idea of declaring his 
candidacy for Lacordaire's seat instead of for Scribe's, which was liis original 
plan — the admonition: "Leave the Academic as it is, more surprised than 
shocked." Baudelaire withdraws his application. See Porche, La Vie douloureuse 
de Charles Baudelaire (Paris), p. 247. [J27a,7] 

"Note that this innovator has not a single new idea. After Vigny, one must wait 
until Sully-Prudhomme to find new ideas in a French poet. Baudelaire never 
entertains anything but the most threadbare platitudes. He is the poet of aridity 
and banality. "Benediction": the artist here below is a martyr. "L'Albatros": the 
artist flounders in reality. "Les Phares": artists are the beacons of humanity. . . . 
Brunetiere is surely right: there is nothing more in "Une Charogne" than the 
words of Ecclesiasticus, 'With all flesh, hoth man and beast, . . . are death and 
bloodshed.'"" 7 Emile Faguet, "Baudelaire," La Revue, 87 (1910), p. 619. 

[J28.1] 

"He has almost no imagination. His inspiration is amazingly meager." E. Faguet, 
"Baudelaire," La Revue, 87 (1910), p. 616. [J28,2] 

Faguet draws a comparison between Senancour and Baudelaire — what's more, in 
favor of the former. [J28,3] 

J. -J. Weiss (Revue contemporaine, January 1858): "This line of verse . . . resem- 
bles one of those spinning tops that would hum in the gutter." Cited in Camille 
Vergniol, "Cinquante ans apres Baudelaire," Revue de Paris, 24th year (1917), 
p. 687. [J28,4] 



Pontmartin in his critique of the portrait of Baudelaire by Nargeot: "This engrav- 
ing shows us a face that is haggard, sinister, ravaged, and malign; it is the face of a 
hero of the Court of Assizes, or of a pensioner from Bicetre." Compare B2a,6 
(Vischer: the "freshly beheaded" look). [J28,5] 

Adverse criticism from Brunetiere in 1887 and 1889. In 1892 and 1893 come the 
corrections. The sequence: Questions de critique (June 1887); Essai sur la littera- 
ture content por aine (1889); ISouveaux Essais sur la litterature contemporaine 
(1892); Evolution de la poesie lyrique en France (1893). 1311 [ J28,6] 

Physiognomy of Baudelaire in his last years: "He has an aridity in all his features, 
which contrasts sharply with the intensity of his look. Above all, he has that set to 
his lips which indicates a mouth long accustomed to chewing only ashes." Francois 
Porche, La Vie douloureuse de Charles Baudelaire (series entitled Le Roman des 
grandes existences, vol. 6) (Paris <1926>), p. 291. [J28,7] 

1861. Suicidal impulses. Arsene Houssaye of La Revue contemporain learns that 
some of the Petits Poemes en prose appearing in his journal have already appeared 
in the La Revue fantaisiste. Publication is suspended. — Lm, Revue des deux 
mondes rejects the essay on Guys. — Le Figaro brings it out with an "editorial 
note" by Bourdin. [ J28.8] 

First lectures in Belgium: Delacroix, Gautier. [ J28a,l] 

The Ministry of the Interior refuses to issue its stamp to Les Paradis artificiels. 
(See Porche, p. 226.) What does that signify? [J28a,2] 

Porche (p. 233) points out that Baudelaire throughout his life retained the mind- 
set of a young man of good family. — Very instructive in this regard: "In every 
change there is something at once vile and agreeable, some element of disloyalty 
and restlessness. This sufficiently explains the French Revolution.'"^ The senti- 
ment recalls Proust — who was also a Jib de famille. The historical projected into 
the intimate. [J28a,3] 

Meeting between Baudelaire and Proudhon in 1848 at the offices of Proudhon's 
daily newspaper, Le Representant du peuple. A chance encounter, it ends with 
their having dinner together on the Rue Neuve-Vivienne. [J28a,4] 

The hypothesis that Baudelaire, in 1848, helped to found the conservative news- 
paper Le Representant de I'Indre (later edited by Ponroy) comes from Renejohan- 
net. The newspaper supported the candidacy of Cavaignac. Baudelaire's 
collaboration at that moment, assuming it took place at all, may have involved a 
mystification. Without his knowledge, his trip to Chateauroux was subsidized, 
through Ancelle, by Aupick. [J28a,5] 



According to Le Dantec, the second tercet of "Sed Non Satiata" is in some degree 
linked to "Les Lesbiennes." [J28a,6] 



By 1843, according to Prarond, a great many poems from Le Fleurs du mal were 
already written. [ J28a,7] 

In 1845, "The Gold-Bug" is translated by Alphonse Borghers as "Le Scarabee 
d'or" in La Revue britannique. The next year, La Quotidienne publishes an adapta- 
tion, signed by initials only, of "The Murders in the Rue Morgue," wherein Poe's 
name goes unmentioned. Decisive for Baudelaire, according to Asselineau, was 
the translation of "The Black Cat" by Isabelle Meunier, in La Democratie pacifique 
(1847). Characteristically enough, the first of Baudelaire's translations fromPoe, 
to judge by the date of publication <July 15, 1848>, was of "Mesmeric Revela- 
tion." [J28a,8] 

1855: Baudelaire writes a letter to George Sand, interceding on behalf of Marie 
Daubrun. [J28a,9] 

"Always very polite, very haughty, and very unctuous at the same time, there was 
about him something reminiscent of the monk, of the soldier, and of the cosmopoli- 
tan." Judith Cladel, Bonshommes (Paris, 1879), cited in E. and J. Crepet, Charles 
Baudelaire (Paris, 1906), p. 237. [J29,l] 

In his "Notes et documents pourmon avocat," Baudelaire refers to the letters on 
art and morality which Balzac addressed to Hippolyte Castille in the newspaper 
La Semaine. 110 [ J29,2] 

Lyons is noted for its thick fog. [ J29,3] 

In 1845, apparent suicide attempt: knife wound in the chest. [J29,4] 

"It is partly a life of leisure that has enahled me to grow. — To my great detri- 
ment — for leisure without fortune breeds dehts. . . . But also to my great profit, as 
regards sensibility and meditation. . . . Other men of letters are, for the most part, 
hase ignorant drudges." 141 Cited in Porche, <La Vie douloureuse de Charles 
Baudelaire (Paris, 1926),> p. 116. [ J29,5] 

Louis Goudall's article in Le Figaro of November 4, 1855, which took aim at the 
publication of poems in La Revue des deux mondes, caused Michel Levy to give up 
the rights to Les Fleurs du mal to Poulet-Malassis. [ J29,6] 



1848: Le Salut public, with Champfleury and Toubin. First issue, February 27, 
written and edited in less than two hours. In that issue, presumably hy the hand 
of Baudelaire: "A few misguided hrethren have smashed some mechanical 



presses. . . . AH machinery is sacred, like a work of art" (cited in Porche, 
p. 129).— Compare "the bloody apparatus of Destruction." 1 12 [ J29.7] 



1849: Le Representant de I'Indre. Baudelaire's participation not established with 
certainty. If the article "Actuellement" <At the Present Time> is written by him, 
then a certain mystification at the expense of the conservative principals at the 
newspaper is not out of the question. [ J29.8] 

1851: with Dupont and La Chambaudie, La Republique du peuple, democratic 
almanac; "Editor, Baudelaire." Only "L'Ame du vin" <The Soul of the Wine> is 
puhlished there with his signature, [ J29,9] 

1852: with Champfleury and Monselet, La Semaine thedtrale. [ J29,10] 



Addresses: February 1854 

May 
1858 

Decemher 1858 
Summer 1859 



Hotel de York, Rue Sainte-Anne 
Hotel du Maroc, Rue de Seine 
Hotel Voltaire, Quai Voltaire 
22 Rue Beautreillis 

Hotel de Dieppe, Rue d'Amsterdam 

[J29.ll] 



At the age of twenty-seven, Baudelaire was gray at the temples. [J29,12] 

From Charles Asselineau, Baudelaire: Recueil d'Anecdotes (in Crepet, Charles 
Baudelaire [Paris, 1908], <pp. 279ff.> published in extenso): the story of 
Asselineau's handkerchief Baudelaire's obstinacy. Provocative effects of his 
"diplomacy." His mania for shocking people. [ J29a,l] 

From Gautier's obituary for Baudelaire, Le Moniteur, September 9, 1867: "Born 
in India, and possessing a thorough knowledge of the English language, he made 
his debut with his translations of Edgar Poe." Theopbile Gautier, Portraits con- 
temporains (Paris, 1874), p. 159. [J29a,2] 

A good half of Gautier's obituary notice is occupied with Poe. The part devoted to 
Les Fleurs du mal depends on metaphors which Gautier extracts from a story by 
Hawthorne: "We never read Les Fleurs du mal, by Baudelaire, without thinking 
involuntarily of that tale by Hawthorne <entitled "Rappaccini's Daughter"); it has 
those somber and metallic colors, those verdigris blossoms and heady perfumes. 
His muse resembles the doctor's daughter whom no poison can harm, but whose 
pallid and anemic complexion betrays the influence of the milieu she inhabits." 
Theophile Gautier, Portraits contemporains (Paris, 1874), p. 163. <See J3a,2.> 

[J29a,3] 

Gautier's characterization of Baudelaire, in his Hutoire du Romantume, is not 
much more than a succession of questionable metaphors. "This poet's talent for 



concentration has caused him to reduce each piece to a single drop of essence 
enclosed in a crystal flagon cut with many facets," and so on (p. 350). Banality 
pervades the entire analysis. "Although he loves Paris as Balzac loved it; al- 
though, in his search for rhymes, he wanders through its most sinister and 
mysterious lanes at the hour when the reflections of the lights change the pools of 
rainwater into pools of blood, and when the moon moves along the broken 
outline of the dark roofs like an old yellow ivory skull; although he stops at times 
by the smoke-dimmed windows of taverns, listening to the croaking song of the 
drunkard and the strident laugh of the prostitute, ... yet very often a suddenly 
recurring thought takes him back to India." Theophile Gautier, Histoire du Ro- 
mantume (Paris, 1874), p. 379 ("Le Progres de la poesie franchise depuis 1830").' u 
Compare Rollinat! [ J29a,4] 

Interior of the Hotel Pimodarr. no sideboard, no dining room table, frosted glass 
panes. At that point, Baudelaire had a servant. [ J29a,5] 

1851: new poems in he Messager de V ' Assemblee. The Saint-Simonian Revue poli- 
tique turns down his manuscripts. Porche remarks that it looks very much as 
though Baudelaire was not really able to choose where to publish. [ J30,l] 

The fortune Baudelaire inherited in 184.2 totaled 75,000 francs (in 1926, equiva- 
lent to 450,000 francs). To his colleagues — BanviJle — he passed for "very rich." 
He soon afterward discreetly left home. [J30,2] 

As Porche nicely puts it (<La Vie douloureuse de Charles Baudelaire [Paris, 
1926],> p. 98), Ancelle was the embodiment of the "legal world." [ J30,3] 

Journey to Bordeaux in 1841 by stagecoach, one of the last. — A very severe 
storm Baudelaire went through on board the ship commanded by Captain Saliz, 
the Paquebot des Men du Sud, appears to have left little trace in his work. [ J30,4] 

Baudelaire's mother was twenty-six and his father sixty when they married in 
1819. [J30.5] 

In the Hotel Pimodan, Baudelaire wrote with a red goose quill. [ J30,6] 

"Mesmeric Revelation," certainly not one of Poe's more distinguished works, is 
the only story to be translated by Baudelaire during the American author's life- 
time. 1852: Poe biography in La Revue de Paris. 1854: beginning of the translation 
work. [J30,7] 

It should be remembered that Jeanne Duval was Baudelaire's first love. [ J 3 0,8] 



Meetings with his mother in the Louvre during the years of dissension with Aupick. 

[J30.9] 



The banquets organized by Philoxene Boyer. Baudelaire gives readings of "Une 
Charogne," "Le Vin de l'assassin," "Delphine et Hippolyte" (Porche, <La Vie dou- 
loureuse de Charles Baudelaire [Paris, 1926], > p. 158). [ J30,10] 

Porche (p. 98) draws attention to the fact that, with Saliz, Ancelle, and Aupick, 
Baudelaire had relations of a typical sort. [J30.ll] 

Sexual preoccupations, as revealed by the titles of projected novels: "Les En- 
seignements d'un monstre" <Education of a Monsteo, "Une Infame adoree" 
<Beloved Slattern>, "La Maitresse de 1'idiot" <The Idiot's Mistress>, "Les 
Tribades" <The Dykes>, "L'Entreteneur" <The Keeper>. [ J30,12] 

Consider that Baudelaire not infrequently, it appears, loved to humble himself in 
long conversations with Ancelle. In this, too, he is a Jils de famille. More along 
these lines in his farewell letter: "I shall probably have to live a very hard life, but 
I shall be better off that way."" 5 [ J30.13] 

Cladel mentions a "noble and transcendent dissertation" by Baudelaire on the 
physiognomy of language, having to do with the colors of words, their peculiarities 
as sources of light, and finally their moral characteristics. [J30a,l] 

Indicative of a perhaps not uncommon tone in the exchanges between the two 
writers is Champfleury's letter of March 6, 1863. Baudelaire, in a letter now lost, 
had declined Champfleury's proposal to meet a female admirer of the Le Fleurs 
du mal and the writings of Poe, making a point of his dignity. Champfleury 
responds: "As for my compromised dignity, I refuse to hear of it. Stop frequenting 
places of far worse repute. Try to imitate my life of hard work; be as independent 
as I am; never have to depend on others — and then you can talk about dignity. / 
The word, in fact, means nothing to me, and I put it down to your peculiar ways, 
which are both affected and natural" (cited in E. and J. Crepet, <Charles Baude- 
laire [Paris, 1906],> appendix, p. 341). Baudelaire (Lettres, pp. 349ff.) writes back 
on the same day. 146 [J30a,2] 

Hugo to Baudelaire, August 30, 1857. He acknowledges receipt of Les Fleurs du 
mal. "Art is like the heavens; it is the infinite field. You have just proved that. Your 
Fleurs du mal are as radiant and dazzling as the stars." Cited in Crepet, p. 113. 
Compare the great letter of October 6, 1859, containing the formula and credo of 
progress. [J30a,3] 

Paul de Molenes to Baudelaire, May 14, 1860. "You have this gift for the new, 
something that has always seemed to me precious — indeed, almost sacred." Cited 
in Crepet, p. 413. [J30a,4] 



Ange Efechmeja, Bucharest, February 11-23, 1866. In this long letter full of great 
admiration, an exact outlook on la poesie pure: "I would say something more: I 



am convinced that, if the syllables that go to form verses of this kind were to be 
translated by the geometric forms and subtle colors which belong to them by 
analogy, they would possess the agreeable texture and beautiful tints of a Persian 
carpet or Indian shawl. / My idea will strike you as ridiculous; but I have often 
felt like drawing and coloring your verse." Cited in Crepet, p. 415. [J30a,5] 

Vigny to Baudelaire, January 27, 1862: "How . . . unjust you are, it seems to me, 
toward this lovely bouquet, so variously scented with odors of spring, for having 
given it a title it does not deserve, and how much I deplore that poisonous air 
which you sometimes pipe in from the murky bourne of Hamlet's graveyard." 
Cited in Crepet, p. 441. [J30a,6] 

From the letter that Baudelaire sent to Empress Eugenie, November 6, 1857: "But 
the fine, increased by costs that are unintelligible to me, exceeds the resources of 
the proverbial poverty of poets, and . . . , convinced that the heart of the Empress 
is open to pity for all tribulations, spiritual as well as material, I have conceived 
the idea, after a period of indecision and timidity that lasted ten days, of appealing 
to the gracious goodness of your Majesty and of entreating your intercession with 
the minister of justice." 1 ' 17 H. Patry, "L'Epilogue du proces des Fleurs du mal: Une 
Lettre inedite de Baudelaire a l'lmperatrice," Revue d'histoire litteraire de la 
France, 29th year (1922), p. 71. [J31.1] 

From Schaunard, Souvenirs (Paris, 1887): '"I detest the countryside,' says 
Baudelaire in explanation of his hasty departure from Honfleur, 'particularly in 
good weather. The persistent sunshine oppresses me. . . . Ah! speak to me of those 
everchanging Parisian skies that laugh or cry according to the wind, and that 
never, in their variable heat and humidity, have any effect on the stupid crops. . . . 
I am perhaps affronting your convictions as a landscape painter, but I must tell 
you further that an open body of water is a monstrous thing to me; I want it 
incarcerated, contained within the geometric walls of a quay. My favorite walking 
place is the emhankment along the Canal de l'Ourcq'" (cited in Crepet, p. 160). 

[J31.2] 

Crepet juxtaposes Schaunard's report with the letter to Desnoyers, and then re- 
marks in closing: "What can we conclude from all this? Perhaps simply that 
Baudelaire belonged to that family of unfortunates who desire only what they do 
not have and love only the place where they are not" (Crepet, p. 161). [J31,3] 

Baudelaire's sincerite was formerly much discussed. Traces of this debate are still 
to be found in Crepet (see p. 172). [ J31 ,4] 

"The laughter of children is like the blossoming of a flower. ... It is a plant-like 
joy. And so, in general, it is more like a smile — something analogous to the wagging 
of a dog's tail, or the purring of a cat. And if there still remains some distinction 
hetween the laughter of children and such expressions of animal contentment, . . . 
this is hecause their laughter is not entirely free of ambition, as is only proper to 



little scraps of men — that is, to budding Satans." "De l'Essence du rire," Oeuvres, 
ed. Le Dantec, vol. 2, p. 174. 14l! [J31.5] 



Christ knew anger, and also tears; he did not laugh. Virginie would not laugh at 
the sight of a caricature. The sage does not laugh, nor does innocence. "The 
comic element is a damnable thing, and one of diabolical origin." "De l'Essence 
du rire," Oeuvres, ed. Le Dantec, vol. 2, p. 168. m [J31a,l] 

Baudelaire distinguishes the "significative comic" from the "absolute comic." The 
latter alone is a proper object of reflection: the grotesque. 130 [ J31a,2] 

Allegorical interpretation of modern clothing for men, in the "Salon de 1846": "As 
for the garb, the outer husk, of the modern hero, ... is it not the necessary garb of 
our suffering age, which wears the symbol of perpetual mourning even on its thin 
black shoulders? Notice how the black suit and the frock coat possess not only 
their political beauty, which is an expression of universal equality, but also their 
poetic beauty, which is an expression of the public soul — an endless procession of 
hired mourners, political mourners, amorous mourners, bourgeois mourners. We 
are all of us celebrating some funeral." Oeuvres, ed. Le Dantec, vol. 2, p. 134. 151 

[J31a,3] 

The incomparable force of Poe's description of the crowd. One thinks of early- 
lithographs by Senef elder, like "Der Spielclub" <The Players' Club>, "Die Menge 
nach Einbruch der Dunkelheit" <The Crowd after Nightfallx "The rays of the 
gas lamps, feeble at first in their struggle with the dying day, had now at length 
gained ascendancy, and threw over everything a fitful and garish luster. All was 
dark yet splendid — as that ebony to which has been likened the style of Tertul- 
lian." 152 Edgar Poe, Nouvelles Hutoires extraordinaires, trans. Charles Baudelaire 
(Paris <1886>), p. 94. D Flaneur 0 [J31a,4] 

"Imagination is not fantasy. . . . Imagination is an almost divine faculty which 
perceives . . . the intimate and secret relations of things, the correspondences and 
the analogies." <Baudelaire,> "Notes nouvelles sur Edgar Poe," Nouvelles His- 
toires extraordinaires, pp. 13-14. 153 [J31a,5] 

Purely emblematic book illustration — ornamented with devices — which Brac- 
quemond had designed for the planned de luxe edition of Les Fleurs du mal 
around 1862. The only copy of the plate was sold by Champfleury, and later 
acquired by Avery (New York). [ J31a,6] 

Concerning the conception of the crowd in Victor Hugo, two very characteristic 
passages from "La Pente de la reverie" <The Propensity for Reverio: 

Crowd without name! Chaos! — Voices, eyes, footsteps. 
Those never seen, those never known. 
All the living! — cities buzzing in the ear 
More than any beehive or American woods. 



The following passage shows the crowd depicted by Hugo as though with the 
burin of an engraver: 

The night with its crowd, in this hideous dream, 
Came on — growing denser and darker together — 
And, in these regions which no gaze can fathom, 
The increase of men meant the deepening of shadow. 
All became vague and uncertain; only a breath 
That from moment to moment would pass, 
As though to grant me a view of the great anthill, 
Opened in the far-reaching shadow some valleys of light, 
As the wind that blows over the tossing waves 
Whitens the foam, or furrows the wheat in the fields. 

Victor Hugo, Oeuvres completes, Poesie, vol. 2 (Les Orientales, Feuilles d'automne) 
(Paris, 1880), pp. 363, 365-366. [J32.1] 

Jules Troubat — Sainte-Beuve's secretary — to Poulet-Malassis, April 10, 1866: 
"See, then, how poets always end! Though the social machine revolves, and regu- 
lates itself for the bourgeoisie, for professional men, for workers, ... no benevo- 
lent statute is being established to guarantee those unruly natures impatient of all 
restraint the possibility, at least, of dying in a bed of their own. — 'But the 
brandy?' someone will ask. What of it? You too drink, Mister Bourgeois, Mister 
Grocer; you have as many vices as — and even more than — the poet. . . . Balzac 
burns himself out with coffee; Musset besots himself with absinthe and still pro- 
duces his most beautiful stanzas; Murger dies alone in a nursing home, like Baude- 
laire at this very moment. And not one of these writers is a socialist!" (Cited in 
Crepet, <Baudelaire [Paris, 1906],) pp. 196-197.) The literary market. [J32,2] 

In a draft of the letter to Jules Janin (1865), Baudelaire plays Juvenal, Lucan, and 
Petronius off against Horace. [ J32,3] 

Letter to Jules Janin: "melancholy, always inseparable from the feeling for 
beauty." Oeuvres, ed. Le Dantec, vol. 2, p. 610. [J32,4] 

"Every epic intention ... is the result of an imperfect sense of art." <Baudelaire,> 
"Notes nouvelles sur Edgar Poe" {Nouvelles Hutoires extraordinaires [Paris, 1886], 
p. 18). 131 This is, in embryo, the whole theory of "pure poetry." (Immobilization!) 

[J32,5] 

According to Crepet (<Baudelaire [Paris, 1906], > p. 155), most of the drawings left 
by Baudelaire portray "macabre scenes." [J32a,l] 

"Among all the books in the world today, the Bible being the sole exception, Les 
Fleurs du mml is the most widely published and the most often translated into other 
languages." Andre Suares, Trois Grands Vivants (Paris <1938>), p. 269 ("Baude- 
laire et Les Fleurs du maV). [ J32a,2] 



"The life of Baudelaire is a desert for anecdotes." Andre Suares, Trois Grands 
Vivants (Paris), p. 270 ("Baudelaire et Les Fleurs du mal"). [J32a,3] 



"Baudelaire does not describe." Andre Suares, Trois Grands Vivants (Paris), 
p. 294 ("Baudelaire et Les Fleurs du maV). [ J32a,4] 

In the "Salon de 1859," vehement invective against I'amour — apropos of a cri- 
tique of the Neo-Greek school: "Yet aren't we quite weary of seeing paint and 
marble squandered on behalf of this elderly scamp ...?... His hair is thickly 
curled like a coachman's wig; his fat wobbling cheeks press against his nostrils and 
his eyes; it is doubtless the elegiac sighs of the universe which distend his flesh, or 
perhaps I should say his meat, for it is stuffed, tubulous, and blown out like a bag 
of lard hanging on a butcher's hook; on his mountainous back is attached a pair of 
butterfly wings." Ch. B., Oeuvres, ed. Le Dantec (Paris), vol. 2, p. 243. ir,f ' 

[J32a,5] 

"There is a worthy publication in which every contributor knows all and has a 
word to say about all, a journal in which every member of the staff . . . can instruct 
us, by turns, in politics, religion, economics, the fine arts, philosophy, and litera- 
ture. In this vast monument of fatuity, which leans toward the future like the 
Tower of Pisa, and in which nothing less than the happiness of humankind is being 
worked out . . ." Ch. B., Oeuvres, ed. Le Dantec (Paris), vol. 2, p. 258 ("Salon de 
1859"). (Le Globe?) m [J32a,6] 

In defense of Ricard: "Imitation is the intoxication of supple and brilliant minds, 
and often even a proof their superiority." Ch. B., Oeuvres, ed. Le Dantec, vol. 2, 
p. 263 ("Salon de 1859"). Pro domo'. m [J32a,7] 

"That touch of slyness which is always mingled with innocence. " Ch. B., Oeuvres, 
ed. Le Dantec, vol. 2, p. 264 ("Salon de 1859"). On Ricard. 15 " [J32a,8] 

Vigny in "Le Mont des oliviers" (Mount of Olives), against de Maistre: 

He has been on this earth for many long ages, 
Born from harsh masters and false-speaking sages, 
Who still vex the spirit of each living nation 

With spurious conceptions of my true redemption. 159 [J33,l] 

"Perhaps only Leopardi, Edgar Poe, and Dostoevsky experienced such a dearth of 
happiness, such a power of desolation. Round ahout him, this century, which in 
other respects seems so flourishing and multifarious, takes on the terrrible aspect 
of a desert." Edmond Jaloux, "Le Centenaire de Baudelaire," La Revue hebdo- 
madaire, 30th year, no. 27 (July 2, 1921), p. 77. [J33.2] 

"All by himself, Baudelaire made poetry a method of analysis, a form of introspec- 
tion. In this, he is very much the contemporary of Flauhert or of Claude Ber- 



nard." Edmond Jaloux, "Le Centenaire de Baudelaire,' 1 La Revue hebdo- 
madaire, 30th year, no. 27 (July 2, 1921), p. 69. [J33.3] 



List of Baudelaire's topics, in Jaloux: "nervous irritability of the individual de- 
voted to solitude . . . ; abhorrence of the human condition and the need to confer 
dignity upon it through religion or through art ... ; love of debauchery in order to 
forget or punish oneself . . . ; passion for travel, for the unknown, for the 
new; . . . predilection for whatever gives rise to thoughts of death (twilight, 
autumn, dismal scenes) . . . ; adoration of the artificial; complacency in spleen." 
Edmond Jaloux, "Le Centenaire de Baudelaire," La Revue hebdomadaire, 30th 
year, no. 27 (July 2, 1921), p. 69. Here we see how an exclusive regard for 
psychological considerations blocks insight into Baudelaire's genuine originality. 

[J33.4] 

Influence of Les Fleurs du mat, around 1885, on Rops, Moreau, Rodin. [J33.5] 

Influence of "Les Correspondances" on Mallarme. [ J33,6] 

Baudelaire's influence on Realism, then on Symbolism. Moreas, in the Symbolist 
manifesto of September 18, 1886 (Le Figaro): "Baudelaire must be considered the 
true precursor of the present movement in poetry." [ J33,7] 

Claudel: "Baudelaire has celebrated the only passion which the nineteenth cen- 
tury could feel with sincerity: Remorse." Cited in Le Cinquantenaire de Charles 
Baudelaire (Paris, 1917), p. 43. (Compare J53,l.> [J33,8] 

"A Dantesque nightmare." Leconte de Lisle, cited in Le Cinquantenaire de 
Charles Baudelaire (Paris, 1917), p. 17. [ J33a,l] 

Edouard Thierry compares Les Fleurs de mal to the ode written by Mirabeau 
during his imprisonment at Vincennes. Cited in Le Cinquantenaire de Charles 
Baudelaire (Paris, 1917), p. 19. [J33a,2] 

Verlaine (where?): "The profound originality of Baudelaire is ... to have repre- 
sented, in a powerful and essential way, modern man. . . . By this, I mean only 
modern man in the physical sense . . . , modern man with his senses stirred up and 
vibrating, his spirit painfully subtle, his brains saturated with tobacco, and his 
blood on fire with alcohol. . . . Charles Baudelaire . . . may be said to personify the 
ideal type, the Hero if you will, of this individuality in sensitivity. Nowhere else, 
not even in Heinrich Heine, will you find it accentuated so strongly." Cited in Le 
Cinquantenaire de Charles Baudelaire (Paris, 1917), p. 18. [ J33a,3] 

Lesbian motifs in Balzac (La Fille aux yeux d'or); Gautier (Mademoiselle de 
Maupin); Delatouche (Fragoletta). [J33a,4] 

Poems for Marie Daubrun: "Chant d'automne," "Sonnet d'automne." [J33a,5] 



Meryon and Baudelaire were born in the same year; Meryon died a year after 
Baudelaire. [J33a,6] 



In the years 1842-1845, according to Prarond, Baudelaire was fascinated with a 
portrait of a woman by Greco in the Louvre. Cited in Crepet, <Charles Baudelaire 
[Paris, 1906], > p. 70. [J33a,7] 

Project dated May 1846: "Les Amours et la mort de Lucain" <The Loves and the 
Death of Lucanx [J33a,8] 

"He was twenty-two years old, and he found himself immediately provided with 
employment at the town hall of the seventh arrondissement — -'in the Registry of 
Deaths,' he kept repeating with an air of satisfaction." Maurice Rollinat, Fin 
d'oeuvre; cited in Gustave Geffroy, Mauiice Rollinat, 1846-1903 (Paris, 1919), 
p. 5. [J33a,9] 

Barbey d' Aurevilly has placed Rollinat between Poe and Baudelaire; and he calls 
Rollinat "a poet of the tribe of Dante." Cited in Geffroy, Maurice Rollinat, p. 8. 

[J33a,10] 

Composition of Baudelairean poems by Rollinat. [ J33a,ll] 

"La Voix" <The Voice>: "in the pit's deepest dark, I distinctly see strange 
worlds." 1 " 0 [J33a,12] 

According to Charles Toubin, Baudelaire in 1847 had two domiciles, on the Rue de 
Seine and the Rue de Babylone. On days when the rent was due, he often spent the 
night with friends in a third. See Crepet, <Charles Baudelaire, (Paris, 1906), > 
p. 48. [J34.1] 

Crepet (p. 47) counts fourteen addresses for Baudelaire between 1842 and 1858, 
not including Honfleur and some temporary lodgings. He lived in the Quartier du 
Temple, the He Saint-Louis, the Quartier Saint-Germain, the Quartier Mont- 
martre, the Quartier de la Republique. [ J34,2] 

"You are passing through a great city that has grown old in civilization — one of 
those cities which harbor the most important archives of universal life — and your 
eyes are drawn upward, sursum, ad sidera; for in the public squares, at the corners 
of the crossways, stand motionless figures, larger than those who pass at their 
feet, repeating to you the solemn legends of Glory, War, Science, and Martyr- 
dom, in a mute language. Some are pointing to the sky, whither they ceaselessly 
aspired; others indicate the earth from which they sprang. They brandish, or 
they contemplate, what was the passion of their life and what has become its 
emblem: a tool, a sword, a book, a torch, vitai lampadafBe you the most heedless 
of men, the most unhappy or the vilest, a beggar or a banker, the stone phantom 
takes possession of you for a few minutes and commands you, in the name of the 



past, to think of things which are not of the earth. / Such is the divine role of 
sculpture." Ch. B., Oeuvres, ed. Le Dantec, vol, 2, pp. 274-275 ("Salon de 
1859"). 1(il Baudelaire speaks here of sculpture as though it were present only in 
the big city. It is a sculpture that stands in the way of the passerby. This depiction 
contains something in the highest degree prophetic, though sculpture plays only 
the smallest part in that which would fulfill the prophecy. Sculpture is found <?> 
only in the city. [J34.3] 

Baudelaire speaks of his partiality for "the landscape of romance," more and 
more avoided by painters. From his description, it becomes evident that he is 
thinking of structures essentially Baroque: "But surely our landscape painters are 
far too herbivorous in their diet? They never willingly take their nourishment 
from ruins. ... I feel a longing for . . . crenellated abbeys, reflected in gloomy 
pools; for gigantic bridges, towering Ninevite constructions, haunts of dizzi- 
ness — for everything, in short, which would have to be invented if it did not 
already exist!" Ch. B., Oeuvres, ed. Le Dantec, vol. 2, p. 272 ("Salon de 1859")."' 2 

[J34.4] 

"Imagination . . . decomposes all creation; and with the raw materials accumu- 
lated and disposed in accordance with rules whose origins one cannot find except 
in the furthest depths of the soul, it creates a new world — it produces the sensation 
of newness." Ch. B., Oeuvres, vol. 2, p. 226 ("Salon de 1859"). lf " [J34a,l] 

On the ignorance of painters, with particular reference to Troyon: "He paints on 
and on; he stops up his soul and continues to paint, until at last he hecomes like the 
artist of the moment. . . . The imitator of the imitator finds his own imitators, and 
in this way each pursues his dream of greatness, stopping up his soul more and 
more thoroughly, and above all reading nothing, not even The Perfect Cook, 
which at any rate would have been able to open up for him a career of greater 
glory, if less profit." Ch. B., Oeuvres, vol. 2, p. 219 ("Salon de 1859"). 164 

[J34a,2] 

"The pleasure of being in a crowd is a mysterious expression of sensual joy in the 
multiplication of number. . . . Number is in all. . . . Ecstasy is a number. . . . Relig- 
ious intoxication of great cities." Ch. B., Oeuvres, vol. 2, pp. 626-627 
("Fusees"). 165 Extract the root of the human being! [ J34a,3] 

"The arabesque is the most spiritualistic of designs." Ch. B., Oeuvres, vol. 2, 
p. 629 ("Fusees"). 166 [J34a,4] 

"For my part, I say: the sole and supreme pleasure of love lies in the absolute 
knowledge of doing evil. And man and woman know, from birth, that in evil is to be 
found all voluptuousness." Ch. B., Oeuvres, vol. 2, p. 628 ("Fusees"). lf ' 7 

[J34a,5] 



"Voltaire jests about our immortal soul, which has dwelt for nine months amid 
excrement and urine. . . . He might, at least, have traced, in this localization, a 
malicious gibe or satire directed by Providence against love, and, in the way 
humans procreate, a sign of original sin. After all, we can make love only with the 
organs of excretion." Ch. Baudelaire, Oeuvres, vol. 2, p. 651 ("Mon Coeur mis a 
nu")." ! At this point, Lawrence's defense of Lady Chatterley should be men- 
tioned. [J34a,6] 

Beginnings, with Baudelaire, of a devious rationalization of the charms exerted 
on him by prostitution: "Love may arise from a generous sentiment — namely, the 
liking for prostitution; but it soon becomes corrupted by the liking for owner- 
ship" ("Fusees") , "The human heart's ineradicable love of prostitution — source 
of man's horror of solitude. . . . The man of genius wants to be one — that is, 
solitary. / The glorious thing ... is to remain one by practicing your prostitution 
in your own company" ("Mon Coeur mis a nu"). Vol. 2, pp. 626, 661. 1 " 9 [J34a,7] 

In 1835 Cazotte's Le Diable amour eux is published, with a preface by Gerard de 
Nerval. Baudelaire's line in "Le Possede" — "Mon cher Belzebuth, je t' adore" — is 
an explicit citation of Cazotte. "Baudelaire's verse has a demoniacal sound much 
stranger than the diabolism of the age of Louis Philippe." Claudius Grillet, Le 
Diable dans la litterature an XIX" siecle (Lyons and Paris, 1935), pp. 95-96. 

[J35.1] 

Letter to his mother on December 26, 1853: "Besides, I am so accustomed to 
physical discomforts; I know so well how to put two shirts under a torn coat and 
trousers so threadbare that the wind cuts through them; I know so well how to put 
straw or even paper soles in worn-out shoes that I hardly feel anything except 
moral suffering. Nevertheless, I must confess that I have reached the point of 
being afraid to make brusque movements or to walk very much, for fear of tearing 
my clothes even more." Ch. B., Dernieres Lettres inedites a sa mere, introduction 
and notes by Jacques Crepet (Paris, 1926), pp. 44-45. 170 [J35,2] 

The Goncourts report in their journal on June 6, 1883, the visit of a young man 
from whom they learn that the budding scholars at the high school are divided into 
two camps. The future students of the Ecole Normale have taken About and Sar- 
cey as their models; the others, Edmond de Goncourt and Baudelaire. Journal des 
Goncourts, vol. 6 (Paris, 1892), p. 264. [J35,3] 

To his mother on March 4, 1860, concerning etchings by Meryon: "The hideous 
and colossal figure in the frontispiece is one of the figures decorating the exterior of 
Notre Dame. In the background is Paris, viewed from a height. How the devil this 
man manages to work so calmly over an abyss, I do not know." Ch. B., Dernieres 
Lettres a sa mere, introduction and notes by Jacques Crepet (Paris, 1926), 
pp. 132-133. [J35.4] 



In the Dernieres Lettres (p. 145), this phrase for Jeanne: "that aged beauty who 
has now become an invalid." 171 He wants to leave her an annuity after his death. 

[J35,5] 

Decisive for the confrontation between Baudelaire and Hugo is a passage from 
Hugo's letter of November 17, 1859, to Villemain: "Sometimes I spend the whole 
night meditating on my fate, before the great deep, and ... all I can do is exclaim: 
Stars! Stars! Stars!" Cited in Claudius Grillet, Victor Hugo spirite (Lyons and 
Paris, 1929), p. 100. 172 [J3 5,6] 

The multitudes in Hugo: "The prophet seeks out solitude. . . . He goes into the 
desert to think. Of what? Of the multitudes." Hugo, William Shakespeare, <part 2, 
book> 6. [J35,7] 

Allegory in the spiritualist protocols from Jersey: "Even pure abstractions fre- 
quented Marine-Terrace: Idea, Death, the Drama, the Novel, Poetry, Criticism, 
Humbug. They . . . preferred to make their appearance during the day, while the 
dead came at night." Claudius Grillet, Victor Hugo spirite (Lyons and Paris, 
1929), p. 27. [J35a,l] 

The "multitudes" in Hugo figure as the "depths of the shadow" in Les Chmtiments 
("La Caravane," part 4), Oeuvres completes, vol. 4, Poesie (Paris, 1882), p. 397: 
"The day when our plunderers, our tyrants beyond number, / Will know that 
someone stirs in the depths of the shadow." [J3 5a,2] 

On Les Fleurs du mal: "Nowhere does he make a direct allusion to hashish or to 
opium visions. In this we must admire the superior taste of the poet, completely 
taken up as he is with the philosophic construction of his poem." Georges Roden- 
bach, L'Elite (Paris, 1899), pp. 18-19. [J3 5a,3 ] 

Rodenbach (p. 19) emphasizes, like Beguin, the experience of the correspon- 
dances in Baudelaire. [J35a,4] 

Baudelaire to <Barbey> d'Aurevilly: "Should you take Communion with hands on 
hips?" Cited in Georges Rodenbach, L'Elite (Paris, 1899), p. 6. [J35a,5] 

Three generations (according to Georges Rodenbach, L'Elite [Paris, 1899], pp. 6- 
7) revolve about the "splendid restoration of Notre Dame." The first, forming as it 
were an outer circle, is represented by Victor Hugo. The second, represented by 
<Barbey> d'Aurevilly, Baudelaire, and Hello, forms an inner circle of devotion. 
The third is made up of the group of satanists: Huysmans, Guaita, Peladan. 

[J35a,6] 



"However beautiful a house may be, it is first of all — before we consider its 
beauty — so many feet high and so many feet wide. Likewise, literature, which is 



the most priceless material, is first of all the filling up of so many columns, and a 
literary architect whose name in itself is not a guarantee of profit has to sell at all 
kinds of prices." Ch. B., Oeuvres, vol. 2, p. 385 ("Conseils aux jeunes lit- 
terateurs"). 1 " [J35a,7] 

Note from "Fusees": "The portrait of Serenas by Seneca. That of Stagirus by 
Saint John Chrysostom. Acedia, the malady of monks. Taedium vitae . . ." 
Charles Baudelaire, Oeuvres, vol. 2, p. 632. 17,1 [J35a,8] 

Charles-Henry Hirsch descrihes Baudelaire, in comparison to Hugo, as "more 
capable of adapting to widely varying temperaments, thanks to the keenness of his 
ideas, sensations, and words. . . . The lessons of Baudelaire endure by virtue of 
. . . the strict form which keeps them before our eyes." Citedin Le Cinquantenaire 
de Charles Baudelaire (Paris, 1917), p. 41. [J36,l] 

A remark by Nadar in his memoirs: Around 1911, the director of an agency for 
newspaper clippings told him that Baudelaire's name used to show up in the news- 
papers as often as the names of Hugo, Musset, and Napoleon. See Le Cinquan- 
tenaire de Charles Baudelaire (Paris, 1917), p. 43. [ J36,2] 

Passage from Le Salut publique attributed by Crepet to Baudelaire: "Citizens 
should not give heed ... to such as these — to Barthelemy, Jean Journet, and 
others who extol the republic in execrable verse. The emperor Nero had the laud- 
able habit of rounding up all the bad poets in an amphitheater and flogging them 
cruelly." Cited in Crepet, <Charles Baudelaire (Paris, 1906), > p. 81. [ J36.3] 

Passage from Le Salut publique attributed by Crepet to Baudelaire: "Intellects 
have grown. No more tragedies, no more Roman history. Are we not greater today 
than Bintus?" Cited in Crepet, p. 81. [J36.4] 

Crepet (p. 82) quotes the Notes de M. Champjleury: "De Flotte perhaps belongs 
with Wronski, Blanqui, Swedenborg, and others, in that somewhat bizarre pan- 
theon which lately elevated Baudelaire, following upon the reading of his texts, the 
events of the day, and the notoriety attained overnight by certain figures." 

[J36,5] 

"The work of Edgar Poe — with the exception of few beautiful poems — is the body 
of an art from which Baudelaire has blasted the soul." Andre Suares, Sur la Vie 
(Paris, 1925), vol. 2, p. 99 ("Idees sur Edgar Poe"). [J36,6] 



Baudelaire's theory of imagination, as well as his doctrine of the short poem and 
the short story, are influenced by Poe. The theory of I' art pour I 'art, in Baude- 
laire's formulation, seems to be a plagiarism. [J36.7] 



In his commemorative address, Banville draws attention to Baudelaire's classical 



"Comment on paie ses dettes quand on a du genie" <How a Genius Pays His Debts) 
appeared in 1846 and contains, under the appellative "the second friend," the 
following portrait of Gautier: "The second friend was, and still is, fat, lazy, and 
sluggish; what is more, he has no ideas and can only string words together as the 
Osage strings beads for a necklace." Ch. B., Oeuvres, vol. 2, p. 393. 17:> [J36a,l] 

Hugo: "As for me, I am conscious of the starry gulf in my soul." "Ave, dea — mori- 
turus te salutat: A Judith Gautier," Victor Hugo, Oeuvres choisies: Poesies et 
drames en vers (Paris <1912>), p. 404. [J36a,2] 

In his famous description of the lecture Baudelaire gave on Gautier in Brussels, 
Camille Lemonnier represents in a fascinating way the mounting perplexity into 
which the lecturer's positive glorification of Gautier plunged the audience. They 
had got the impression, as the talk went on, that Baudelaire was going to turn 
with some inimitable sarcasm from all he had said, as from a kind of decoy, in 
order to develop a different conception of poetry. And this expectation paralyzed 
the listeners. [J36a,3] 

Baudelaire — Camille Pelletan's favorite poet. So says Robert de Bonnieres, 
Memoir es d'aujourd'hui, vol. 3 (Paris, 1888), p. 239. [J36a,4] 

Rohert de Bonnieres, Memoires d'uujourd'hui, vol. 3 (Paris, 1888), publishes, on 
pp. 287-288, an exasperated letter sent to Taine by the director of La Revue 
liberule on January 19, 1864 , in which he complains of the intransigence displayed 
by Baudelaire in the course of negotiations over cuts in the piece "Les Vocations" 
(S pleen de Paris). [J36a,5] 

A passage from Rodenbach that exemplifies something typical in the description 
of the city — namely, the forced metaphor: "hi these cities saddened by a choir 
of weathercocks, / Birds of iron dreaming [!] of flight to the skies." Cited in 
G. Tourquet-Milnes, The Influence of Baudelaire in France and England (London, 



In the "Salon de 1846" one sees how precise Baudelaire's concept of a politics of 
art already was at that time: section 12 ("De l'Eclectisme et du doute") and 
section 14 ("De Quelques Douteurs") show that Baudelaire was conscious early 
on of the need to bring artistic production into line with certain fixed points. In 
section 17 ("Des Ecoles et des ouvriers"), Baudelaire speaks of atomization as a 
symptom of weakness. He lauds the schools of old: " Then you had schools of 
painting; now you have emancipated journeymen . . . — a school, . . . that is, the 
impossibility of doubt." Ch. B., Oeuvres, vol. 2, p. 131. 176 Compare le poncif! 



technique. 



[J36.8] 



1913), p. 191. — Parisian modernity! 



[J36a,6] 



[J36a,7] 



On a sheet with the sketch of a female figure and two portraits of a male head, an 
inscription 177 dating back to the nineteenth century: "Portrait of Blanqui 
(Auguste), a good likeness drawn from memory by Baudelaire in 1850, perhaps 
1849?" Reproduction in Feli Gautier, Charles Baudelaire (Brussels, 1904), p. lii. 

[J37.1] 

"He would churn his brains in order to produce astonishment." This comment by 
Leconte de Lisle occurs in the untitled article by Jules Claretie that appears in Le 
Tombeau and that reprints substantial portions of Claretie's obituary notice. Le 
Tombeau de Charles Baudelaire (Paris, 1896), p. 91. Effect of the endings ofpoems! 

□37,2] 

"0 Poet, you who turned the work of Dante upside down, / Exalting Satan to the 
heights and descending to God." Closing lines of Verhaeren's "A Charles Baude- 
laire," in Le Tombeau de Charles Baudelaire (Paris, 1896), p. 84. [J37.3] 

In Le Tombeau de Charles Baudelaire (Paris, 1896), there is a text by Alexandre 
Ourousof, "L' Architecture secrete des Fleurs du mai." It represents an oft- 
repeated attempt to establish distinct cycles in the book, and consists essentially in 
the selection of the poems inspired by Jeanne Duval. It makes reference to the 
article published by <Barbey> d'Aurevilly in Le Pays on July 24, 1857, in which it 
was maintained for the first time that there is a "secret architecture" in the book. 

[J37.4] 

"The echoes of the unconscious are so strong in him — literary creation being, with 
him, so close to physical effort — the currents of passion are so strong, so drawn 
out, so slow and painful, that all his psychic being resides there with his physical 
being." Gustave Kahn, preface to Charles Baudelaire, "Mon Coeur mis a nu" et 
"Fusees" (Paris, 1909), p. 5. [J37.5] 

"If Poe had been a real influence on him, we would find some trace of this in 
Baudelaire's way of imagining . . . scenes of action. In fact, the greater his immer- 
sion in the work of the American writer, the more he avoids fantasies of action .... 
His projected works, his titles for novels ... all had to do with various . . . psychic 
crises. Not one suggests an adventure of any kind." Gustave Kahn, preface to 
Charles Baudelaire, "Mon Coeur mis a nu" et "Fusees" (Paris, 1909), pp. 12-13. 

□37,6] 

Kahn discerns in Baudelaire a "refusal to take the opportunity offered by the 
nature of the lyric pretext." Gustave Kahn, preface to Ch. B., "Mon Coeur mis a 
nu" et "Fusees" (Paris, 1909), p. 15. [J37.7] 

Of the Fleurs du mal illustrated by Rodin for Paul Gallimard, Mauclair writes: 
"You feel that Rodin has handled the book, taken it up and put it down a hundred 
times, that he has read it while out on walks, and at the end of a long evening has 



suddenly reopened it under the lamplight and, haunted by a verse, picked up his 
pen. One can tell where he paused, what page he creased [!], how unsparing he 
must have been of the volume; for he had not been given some de luxe copy needing 
to be protected from damage. It was very much, as he himself liked to describe it, 
'his' pocket Baudelaire." Charles Baudelaire, Vingt-Sept Poemes des Fleurs du 
mal, illustres par Rodin (Paris, 1918), p. 7 (preface by Camille Mauclair). 

[J37a,l] 

The penultimate paragraph in "Chacun sa chimere" <T6 Every Man His Chi- 
mera) is distinctly reminiscent of Blanqui: "And the procession passed by me and 
disappeared in the haze at the horizon, just where the rounded surface of the 
planet prevents the human gaze from following." Ch. B., Oeuvres, vol. 1, p. 4 12. 178 

[J37a,2] 

On the painter Jules Noel: "He is doubtless one of those who impose a daily 
amount of progress upon themselves." "Salon de 1846," Oeuvres, vol. 2, p. 12 6. 179 

[J37a,3] 

In the comment on Les Fleurs du mal that Sainte-Beuve sends to Baudelaire in a 
letter of <June> 20, 1857, he finds this to say about the style of the book: "a curious 
poetic gift and an almost precious lack of constraint in expression." Immediately 
following: "with your pearling of the detail, with your Petrarchism of the horri- 
ble." Cited in Etienne Charavay, A. de Vigny et Charles Baudelaire, candidats a 
VAcademief ranqaise (Paris, 187S), p. 134. [J37a,4] 

"It seems to me that in many things you do not take yourself seriously enough." 
Vigny to Baudelaire on January 27, 1862, apropos of Baudelaire's candidacy for 
the Academie. Cited in Etienne Charavay, A. de Vigny et Charles Baudelaire, 
candidats a I'Academiefrancaise (Paris, 1879), pp. 100-101. [ J37a,5] 

Jules Mouquet, in <the introduction to> his edition of Ch<arles> B<audelaire>, Vers 
retrouves: Manoel (Paris, 1929), looks into the relation between Baudelaire and the 
poems published by <G.> Le Vavasseur, E. Prarond, and A. Argonne in Vers 
(Paris, 1843). There turn out to be a number of filiations. Apart from actual 
contributions by Baudelaire that appear in the second section under the name of 
Prarond, there are important correspondences, in particular that of "Le Reve 
d'un curieux" 180 to "Le Reve," by Argonne (pseudonym of Auguste Dozon). 

[J37a,6] 

Among the twenty-three poems of Les Fleurs du mal known to have been composed 
by the summer of 1843: "Allegorie," "Je n'ai pas oublie," "La Servante au grand 
coeur," "Le Crepuscule du matin." [J38,l] 

"Baudelaire feels a certain reserve about showing his work to the public; he pub- 
lishes bis poems under successive pseudonyms: Prarond, Privat d'Anglemont, 



Pierre de Fayis. 'La Fanfarlo' appears . . . on January 1, 1847, signed by Charles 
Dufays." Ch. B., Vers retrouves, eel. Jules Mouquet (Paris, 1929), p. 47. [J38.2] 



The following sonnet from the body of work by Prarond is attributed by Mouquet 
to Baudelaire: 

Born in the mud to a nameless jade, 

The child grew up speaking argot; 

By the age often, he had graduated from the sewers; 

Grown, he would sell his sister — is a jack-of -all-trades. 

His hack has the curve of an old flying buttress; 
He can sniff out the way to every cheap bordello; 
His look is a mixture of arrogance and cunning; 
He's the one to serve as watchdog for rioters. 

Wax-coated string keeps his thin soles in place; 

On his uncovered pallet a dirty wench laughs 

To think of her husband deceived hy unchaste Paris. 

Plebeian orator of the stockroom, 

He talks politics with the corner grocer. 

Here is what's called an eitfant de Paris. 

Charles Baudelaire, Vers retrouves, ed. Jules Mouquet (Paris, 1929), pp. 103- 
104. [J38.3] 



Freund contends "that the musicality of the poem does not present itself as a 
specific . . . technical quality but is rather the authentic ethos of the poet. . . . 
Musicality is the form taken by I' art pour I'art in poetry." Cajetan Freund, Der 
Vers Baudelaires (Munich, 1927), p. 46. [J38.4] 



On the publication of poems under the title Les Limbes <Limbo> in Le Messager de 
V Assemblee, April 9, 1851: "A small booklet entitled La Presse de 1848 contains 
the following: 'Today we see announced in L'Echo des marchands de vin a collec- 
tion of poems called Les Limbes. These are ivithout doubt socialist poems and, 
consequently, bad poems. Yet another fellow has become a disciple of Proudhon 
through either too much or too little ignorance."' A. de la Fineliere and Georges 
Descaux, Charles Baudelaire (series entitled Essais de bibliographie contempo- 
raine, vol. 1) (Paris, 1868), p. 12. [J38,5] 

Modernity — anticlassical and classical. Anticlassical: as antithesis to the classical 
period. Classical: as heroic fulfillment of the epoch that puts its stamp on its 
expression. [J38a,l] 



There is evidently a connection between Baudelaire's unfavorable reception in 
Belgium, his reputation as a police spy there, and the letter to Le Figaro concern- 
ing the banquet for Victor Hugo. 181 [J38a,2] 



Note the rigor and elegance of the title Curiosites esthetiques. 



[J38a,3] 



The teachings of Fourier: "Although, in nature, there are certain plants which are 
more or less holy, certain . . . animals more or less sacred; and although ... we 
may rightly conclude that certain nations . . . have been prepared ... by Provi- 
dence for a determined goal . . . — nevertheless all I wish to do here is assert their 
equal utility in the eyes of Him who is undefinable." Ch. B., Oeuvres, vol. 2, p. 143 
("Exposition Universelle, 1855"). W:! [J38a,4] 

"One of those narroiv-minded modern professors of aesthetics (as they are called 
by Heinrich Heine), . . . whose stiffened fingers, paralyzed by the pen, can no 
longer run with agility over the immense keyboard of correspondences!'''' Ch. B., 
Oeuvres, vol. 2, p. 145 ("Exposition Universelle, 1855"). 1114 [J38a,5] 

"In the manifold productions of art, there is something always new which will 
forever escape the rules and analyses of the school!" Ch. B., Oeuvres, vol. 2, 
p. 146 ("Exposition Universelle, 1855")." 15 Analogy to fashion. [ J38a,6] 

To the notion of progress in the history of art, Baudelaire opposes a monadologi- 
cal conception. "Transferred into the sphere of the imagination . . . , the idea of 
progress looms up with gigantic absurdity. ... In the poetic and artistic order, 
inventors rarely have predecessors. Every flowering is spontaneous, individual. 
Was Signorelli really the begetter of Michelangelo? Did Perugino contain 
Raphael? The artist depends on himself alone. He can promise nothing to future 
centuries except his own works." Ch. B., Oeuvres, vol. 2, p. 149 ("Exposition 
Universelle, 1855"). 186 [J38a,7] 

Toward a critique of the concept of progress in general: "For this is how disciples 
of the philosophers of steam and sulfur matches understand it: progress appears 
to them only in the form of an indefinite series. Where is that guarantee?" Ch. B., 
Oeuvres, vol. 2, p. 149 ("Exposition Universelle, 1855"). 11,7 [J38a,8] 

"The story is told of Balzac . . . that one day he found himself in front of a . . . 
melancholy winter scene, heavy with hoarfrost and thinly sprinkled with cottages 
and wretched-looking peasants; and that, after gazing at a little house from which 
a thin wisp of smoke was rising, he cried, 'How beautiful it is! But what are they 
doing in that cottage? What are their thoughts? What are their sorrows? Has it 
been a good harvest? No doubt they have bills to pay?' Laugh if you will at M. de 
Balzac. I do not know the name of the painter whose honor it was to set the great 
novelist's soul a-quiver with anxiety and conjecture; but I think that in this way 
... he has given us an excellent lesson in criticism. You will often find me apprais- 
ing a picture exclusively for the sum of ideas or of dreams that it suggests to my 
mind." Ch. B., Oeuvres, vol. 2, p. 147 ("Exposition Universelle, 1855"). 11,11 

[J39.1] 



Conclusion of the "Salon tie 1845": "The painter, the true painter for whom we are 
looking, will be he who can snatch its epic quality from the life of today and can 
make us see and understand, with brush or with pencil, how great and poetic we 
are in our cravats and our patent-leather boots. Next year let us hope that the true 
seekers may grant us the extraordinary delight of celebrating the advent of the 
new!" Ch. B., Oeuvres, vol. 2, pp. 54-55. 189 [J39,2] 

"As for the garb, the outer husk, of the modern hero . . . , has not this much- 
maligned garb its own native beauty and charm? Is it not the necessary garb of our 
suffering age, which wears the symbol of perpetual mourning even on its thin black 
shoulders? Notice how the black suit and the frock coat possess not only their 
political beauty, which is an expression of universal equality, hut also their poetic 
beauty, which is an expression of the public soul — an endless procession of hired 
mourners, political mourners, amorous mourners, bourgeois mourners. We are 
all of us celebrating some funeral. / A uniform livery of mourning hears witness to 
equality. . . . Don't these puckered creases, playing like serpents around the mor- 
tified flesh, have their own mysterious grace? / . . . For the heroes of the Iliad 
cannot compare with you, 0 Vautrin, 0 Rastignac, O Birotteau — nor with you, 0 
Fontanares, who dared not publicly recount your sorrows wearing the funereal 
and rumpled frock coat of today; nor with you, 0 Honore de Balzac, you the most 
heroic, the most amazing, the most romantic and the most poetic of all the charac- 
ters that you have drawn from your fertile bosom!" Ch. B., Oeuvres, vol. 2, 
pp. 134, 136 ("Salon de 1846: De l'Heroisme de la vie moderne"). 190 The last 
sentence concludes the section. [ J39,3] 

"For when I hear men like Raphael and Veronese being lauded to the skies, with 
the manifest intention of diminishing the merit of those who came after them, . . . 
I ask myself if a merit which is at least the equal of theirs (I will even admit for a 
moment, and out of pure compliance, that it may be inferior) is not infinitely 
more meritorious, since it has triumphantly evolved in an atmosphere and a 
territory which are hostile to it." Ch. B., Oeuvres, vol. 2, p. 239 ("Salon de 
1859"). m Lukacs says that to make a decent table today, a man needs all the 
genius once required of Michelangelo to complete the dome of St. Peter's. 

[J39a,l] 

Baudelaire's attitude toward progress was not always the same. Certain declara- 
tions in the "Salon de 1846" contrast clearly with remarks made later. In that 
essay we find, among other things: "ITiere are as many kinds of beauty as there 
are habitual ways of seeking happiness. This is clearly explained by the philoso- 
phy of progress. . . . Romanticism will not consist in a perfect execution, but in a 
conception analogous to the ethical disposition of the age" (p. 66). In the same 
text: "Delacroix is the latest expression of progress in art" (p. 85). Ch. B., 
Oeuvres, vol. 2. 192 [J39a,2] 



The importance of theory for artistic creation was not something about which 
Baudelaire was clear, initially. In the "Salon de 1845," discussing the painter 
Haussoullier, he asks: "Is M. Haussoullier perhaps one of those who know too 
much about their art? That is a truly dangerous scourge." Ch. B., Oeuvres, vol. 2, 
p. 23.™ [J39a,3] 

A critique of the idea of progress, such as may become necessary in connection 
with a presentation of Baudelaire, must take great care to differentiate itself from 
the latter's own critique of progress. This applies still more unconditionally to 
Baudelaire's critique of the nineteenth century and to that entailed by his biogra- 
phy. It is a mark of the warped and crassly ignorant portrait of Baudelaire drawn 
by Peter Klassen that the poet should appear against the background of a century 
painted in the colors of Geheima. The only thing in this century really worthy of 
praise, in the author's view, is a certain clerical practice — namely, that moment 
"when, in token of the reestablished kingdom of the grace of God, the Holy of 
Holies was carried through the streets of Paris in an entourage of shining arma- 
ments. This will have been an experience decisive, because fundamental, for his 
entire existence." So begins this presentation of the poet framed in the depraved 
categories of the George circle. Peter Klassen, Baudelaire (VNcimar <1931>), p. 9. 

[J39a,4] 

Gauloiserie in Baudelaire: "lb organize a grand conspiracy for the extermination 
of the Jewish race. / The Jews who are librarians and bear witness to the Redemp- 
tion." Ch. B., Oeuvres, vol. 2, p. 666 ("Mon Coeur mis a nu"). 1!M Celine has 
continued along these lines. (Cheerful assassins!) [J40,l] 

"More military metaphors: 'The poets of combat.' 'The vanguard of literatnre.' 
This weakness for military metaphors is a sign of natures that are not themselves 
militant, hut are made for discipline — that is to say, for conformity. Natures 
congenitally domestic, Belgian natures that can think only in unison." Ch. B., 
Oeuvres, vol. 2, p. 654 ("Mon Coeur- mis a nu"). 1 ' 5 [J40.2] 

"If a poet demanded from the state the right to keep a few bourgeois in his stable, 
people would he very surprised; whereas if a bourgeois demanded a roast poet, 
people would find this quite natural." Ch. B., Oeuvres, vol. 2, p. 635 

("Fusees"). 1 '* [J40.3] 

"This hook is not made formy wives, my daughters, or my sisters. — I have little to 
do with snch things." Ch. B., Oeuvres, vol. 2, p. 635 ("Fusees"). 197 [J40.4] 

Baudelaire's estrangement from the age: "Tell me in what salon, in what tavern, 
in what social or intimate gathering you have heard a single witty remark uttered 
by a spoiled child [compare p. 217: "Tbe artist is today . . . but a spoiled child"] a 
profound remark, to make one ponder or dream . . . ? If such a remark has been 
tlirown out, it may indeed have been not by a politician or a philosopher, but by 



someone of an outlandish profession, like a hunter, a sailor, or a taxidermist. But 
by an artist . . . , never." Ch. B., Oeuvres, vol. 2, p. 217 ("Salon de 1859"). This is 
a sort of evocation of the "amazing travelers." 198 [ J40,5] 

Gauloiserie in Baudelaire: "In its most widely accepted sense, the word 'French- 
man' means vaudevilliste. . . . Everything that towers or plunges, above or below 
him, causes him prudently to take to his heels. The sublime always affects him like 
a riot, and he opens his Moliere only in fear and trembling — and because someone 
has persuaded him that Moliere is an amusing author." Ch. B., Oeuvres, vol. 2, 
p. Ill ("Salon de 1846: DeM. Horace Vernet"). 199 [J40.6] 

Baudelaire knows, in the "Salon de 1846," "the fatal law of propensities." Ch. B., 
Oeuvres, vol. 2 , p . 114. 2 "" [ J40,7] 

Re the title Les Limbes <Limbo>, compare the passage f rom the "Salon de 1846" on 
Delacroix's painting Women of Algiers: "This little poem of an interior . . . seems 
somehow to exhale the heady scent of a house of ill repute, which quickly enough 
guides our thoughts toward the fathomless limbo of sadness." Ch. B., Oeuvres, 
vol. 2, p. 85. 2U1 [J40.8] 

Apropos a depiction of Samson by Decamps, in the "Salon de 1845": "Samson, 
that ancient cousin of Hercules and Baron von Miinchhausen." Ch. B., Oeuvres, 
vol. 2, p. 24. 2 " 2 [J40a,l] 

"Thus, France was diverted from its natural course, as Baudelaire has shown, to 
become a vehicle of the despiritualization — the 'bestialization' — of folk and 
state." Peter Klassen, Baudelaire (Weimar <1931>), p. 33. [J40a,2] 

Closing line of La Legende des siecles, part 3, section 38 ("Un Homme aux yeux 
profonds passait"): "0 scholar of abyssal things alone!" Victor Hugo, Oeuvres 
completes, Poesie, vol. 9 (Paris, 1883), p. 229. [J40a,3] 

"The boulder with the pensive profile." Victor Hugo, Oeuvres completes, Poesie, 
vol. 9 (Paris, 1883), p. 191 (Le Groupe des idylles, no. 12, "Dante"). [J40a,4] 

Crouching on the summit, the grim sphinx Nature dreams, 
Petrifying with its abyss-gaze 

The magus used to wondrous flights, 
The studious group of pale Zoroastrians, 
Sun-gazers and scanners of the stars, 

The dazzled, the astounded. 



The night revolves in riot 'round the sphinx. 
If we could once lift up its monstrous paw, 
So fascinating to the mind of yesteryear 
(Newton just as much as ancient Hermes), 



Underneath that dark and fatal claw 
We'd find this one word: Love. 



"Man deceives himself! He sees how dark all is for him." Victor Hugo, La Legende 
des siecles, part 3 ("Tenebres"), in Oeuvres completes, Poesie, vol. 9 (Paris, 
1883), pp. 164-165. Ending of the poem. [J40a,5] 

Euding of "La nuit! La nuit! La nuit!" <Night! Night! Night!>: 

O sepulchers! I hear the fearful organ of the shadow, 
Formed from all the cries of somber nature 

And the crash of rocky reefs; 
Death plays the clavier resounding through the branches, 
And the keys, now black, now white, are all 

Your tombstones and your biers. 

Victor Hugo, La Legende des siecles, part 3 ("Tenebres"), in Oeuvres completes, 
Poesie, vol. 9 (Paris, 1883), p. 161. [J40a,6] 

In La Legende des siecles <The Legend of the Ages>, part 3, poems like "Les 
Chutes : Fleuves et poetes" <The Falls: Rivers and Poets> and "Desinteressement" 
<Disinterestedness> — the one devoted to the torrents of the Rhine, the other to 
Mont Blanc — provide an especially vigorous idea of the perception of nature in 
the nineteenth century. In these poems we find the allegorical mode of vision 
uniquely interfused with the spirit of the vignette. [ J40a,7] 

From Theodore de Banville, Mes Souvenirs (Paris, 1882), ch. 7 ("Charles Baude- 
laire"). Their first meeting: "Night had come — luminous soft enchantress. We had 
left the Luxembourg and were walking along the outer boulevards, through streets 
whose movement and mysterious tumult the poet of Les Fleurs du mal had always 
so attentively cherished. Privat d'Anglemont walked a little apart from us, in 
silence" (p. 77). [J41.1] 

From Theodore de Banville, Mes Souvenirs (Paris, 1882): "I no longer recall 
which African country it was in which he was put up by a family to whom his 
parents had sent him. At any rate, he quickly became bored with the conventional 
manners of his hosts, and took off hy himself for a mountain to live with a tall 
young woman of color who understood no French, and who cooked him strangely 
spiced ragouts in a burnished copper cauldron, around which some naked little 
black children were dancing and howling. Oh, hut those ragouts! How well he 
conjured them up, and how one would have loved to try them!" (p. 79). [J41,2] 

"In his lodgings at the Hotel Pimodan, when I went there for the first time to visit 
him, there were no dictionaries, no separate study — not even a table with ivriting 
materials; nor was there a sidehoard or a separate dining room, or anything else 
resemhling the decor of a bourgeois apartment." Theodore de Banville, Mes Son- 
vetiirs (Paris, 1882), pp. 81-82. [J41,3] 



On Joseph tie Maistre: "To the pretensions and the insolence of metaphysics, he 
responded with the historical." J. Barbey d'Aurevilly, Joseph de Maistre, Blanc 
de Saint-Bonnet, Lacordaire, Gratry, Caro (Paris, 1910), p. 9. [J41,4] 

"Some, like Baudelaire, . . . identified the demon, staggered but reoriented them- 
selves, and once more honored God. It would nonetheless be unjust to expect from 
these precursors a surrender of the human faculties as complete as that required, 
for example, in the sort of mysterious dawn it seems we have begun to live at 
present." Stanislas Fumet, Notre Baudelaire [series entitled he Roseau d'or, vol. 
8] (Paris, 1926), p. iii. [ J41,5] 

"This great poetic success thus represents — if we add to these 1,500 copies the 
print-run of 1,000, plus the overruns from the first edition — a sum total of 2,790 
copies maximum in circulation. What other poet of our day, except Victor Hugo, 
could boast of such a demand for his work?" A. de la Fineliere and Georges 
Descaux, Charles Baudelaire [series entitled Essais de bibliographic contempo- 
raine, vol. 1] (Paris, 1868). Note on the second edition of Les Fleurs du mal. 

[J41.6] 

Poe: "Cyrano de Bergerac become a pupil of the astronomer Arago" — Journal des 
Goncourt, July 16, 1856. 203 — "If Edgar Poe dethroned Walter Scott and Merimee, 
if realism and bohemianism triumphed all down the line, if certain poems about 
which I have nothing to say (for fairness bids me be silent) were taken seriously by 
. . . honest and well-intentioned men, then this would no longer he decadence but 
an orgy." Pontmartin, he Spectateur, September 19, 1857; cited in Leon Lemon- 
nier, Edgar Poe et la critique franqaise de 1845 a 1875 (Paris, 1928), pp. 187, 214. 

[J41a,l] 

On allegory: "Limp arms, like weapons dropped by one who flees." 20 ' [ J41a,2] 

Swinburne appropriates for himself the thesis that art has nothing to do with 
morality. [J41a,3] 

"Les Fleurs du mal are a cathedral." Ernest Raynaud, Ch. Baudelaire (Paris, 
1922), p. 305 (citing Gonzague de Reynold, Charles Baudelaire). [J41a,4] 

"Baudelaire frets and torments himself in producing the least word. . . . For him, 
art 'is a duel in which the artist shrieks with terror before being overcome.'" 2115 
Ernest Raynaud, Ch. Baudelaire (Paris, 1922), pp. 317-318. [ J41a,5] 

Raynaud recognizes the incompatibility of Baudelaire and Gautier. He devotes a 
long chapter to this (pp. 310-345). [J41a,6] 



"Baudelaire submitted to the requirements of . . . buccaneer editors who ex- 
ploited the vanity of socialites, amateurs, and novices, and accepted manuscripts 



only if one took out a subscription." Ernest Raynaud, Ch. Baudelaire (Paris, 
1922), p. 319. Baudelaire's own conduct is the complement of this state of affairs. 
He would offer the same manuscript to several different journals and authorize 
reprints without acknowledging them as such. [J41a,7] 

Baudelaire's essay of 1859 on Gautier: "Gautier . . . could not have misinterpreted 
the piece. This is made clear by the fact that, in writing the preface to the 1863 
edition of Les Fleurs du mal, he wittily repaid Baudelaire for his essay." Ernest 
Raynaud, Ch. Baudelaire (Paris, 1922), p. 323. [J41a,8] 

"In other respects, what witnesses most tellingly to the evil spell of those times is 
the story of Balzac, . . . who . . . all his life fairly cudgeled his brains to master a 
style, without ever attaining one. . . . [Note:] The discordancy of those times is 
underscored by the fact that the prisons of La Roquette and Mazas were built with 
the same gusto with which Liberty Trees were planted everywhere. Bonapartist 
propaganada was harshly suppressed, but the ashes of Napoleon were brought 
home. . . . The center of Paris was cleared and its streets were opened up, but the 
city was strangled with a belt of fortifications." Ernest Raynaud, Ch. Baudelaire 
(Paris, 1922), pp. 287-288. [J41a,9] 

After referring to the marriage of ancient Olympus with the wood sprites and 
fairies of Banville: "For his part, little wishing to join the ever-swelling procession 
of imitators on the high road of Romanticism, Charles Baudelaire looked about 
him for a path to originality. . . . Where to cast his lot? Great was his indeci- 
sion. . . . Then he noticed that Christ, Jehovah, Mary, Mary Magdalene, the an- 
gels, and 'their phalanxes' all occupied a place in this poetry, but that Satan never 
appeared in it. An error in logic; he resolved to correct this. . . . Victor Hugo had 
made la diablerie a fantastic setting for some ancient legends. Baudelaire, in con- 
trast, actually incarcerated modern man — the man of the nineteenth century — in 
the prison of hell." Alcide Dusolier, Nos Gens de lettres (Paris, 1864), pp. 105-106 
("M. Charles Baudelaire"). 

[J42.1] 

"He certainly would have made an excellent reporter for die witchcraft trials." 
Alcide Dusolier, Nos Gem de lettres (Paris, 1864), p. 109 ("M. Ch. B."). Baudelaire 
must have enjoyed reading that. [ J42,2] 

With Dusolier, considerable insight into details, but total absence of any perspec- 
tive on the whole: "Obscene mysticism, or, if you prefer, mystical obscenity — 
here, I have said and I repeat, is the double character of Les Fleurs du mal." Alcide 
Dusolier, Nos Gens de lettres (Paris, 1864), p. 1 12. [ J42,3] 

"We would reserve nothing, not even praise. I attest then to the presence, in 
M. Baudelaire's poetic gallery, of certain tableaux parisiens (I would have pre- 
ferred eaux-fortes <etchings> as a more accurate and more characteristic term) 



possessing great vigor and marvelous precision." Alcide Dusolier, ISos Gens de 
lettres (Paris, 1864), pp. 112-113 ("Meryon"). [ J42,4] 

There is a reference in Dusolier, apropos of "Femmes damnees," to La Religieuse 
<The Nun> — but Diderot is not mentioned. [J42,5] 

A further judgment from Dusolier (p. 114); "But can one say, 'Here is a poet'? 
^es, if a rhetor were an orator." The legend about the relation between verse and 
prose in Baudelaire goes back to Dusolier. Shock! [J42,6] 

Closing words: "If I had to sum up in a phrase what Baudelaire is by nature and 
what he would like to persuade us that he is, I would say without any hesitation: he 
is a hysterical Boileau. / May 6, 1863." Alcide Dusolier, Nos Gens de lettres 
(Paris, 1864), p. 119. [J42,7] 

Baudelaire's horoscope, prepared for Raynaud by Paul Flambart: "The psycho- 
logical enigma of Baudelaire is seen almost entirely in this alliance of two things 
ordinarily the least suited to being linked together: a wonderfully fluent poetic 
gift and a crushing pessimism." Ernest Raynaud, Ch. Baudelaire (Paris, 1922), 
p. 54. The Baudelairean psychological antinomy in its tritest formulation. 

[J42.8] 

"Is this to say that we must necessarily assimilate Baudelaire to Dante, as M. de 
Reynold, following the lead of Ernest Raynaud, has done? If it is a question of 
poetic genius, surely admiration . . . can go no further. If it is a question of philo- 
sophical tendency, I would merely remark that Dante . . . , well in advance of his 
time, introduces into his work ideas that are already quite modern, as Lamennais 
has nicely demonstrated, whereas Baudelaire . . . gives full expression to the spirit 
of the Middle Ages and is, accordingly, behind the times. Thus, if the truth be told, 
far from continuing Dante, he differs from him altogether." Paul Souday, "Gon- 
zague de Reynold's Charles Baudelaire'''' (Les Temps, April 21, 1921, "Les 
Livves"). [J42a,l] 

"New editions of Les Fleurs du mal have been announced or are starting to ap- 
pear. Up to now there have been only two on the market, one for six francs, the 
other for three francs fifty. And now one at twenty sous." Paul Souday, "Le Cin- 
quantenaire de Baudelaire" (Le Temps, June 4>, 1917). 2 " r ' [ J42a,2] 

According to Souday — in a review of Baudelaire's letters (Le Temps, August 17, 
1917) — Baudelaire earned a total of 15,000 francs in twenty-five years. [J42a,3] 

"These sturdy ships, with their air of idleness and nostalgia." 20 ' [J42a,4] 



Thesis of Paul Desjardins: "Baudelaire is lacking in verve — that is to say, he has 
no ideas hut only sensations." Paul Desjardins, "Charles Baudelaire," Revue 
bleue (Paris, 1887), p. 22. [J42a,5] 



"Baudelaire does not give us a lifelike representation of objects; he is more con- 
cerned to steep the image in memory than to embellish or portray it." Paul Des- 
jardins, "Charles Baudelaire," Revue bleue (Paris, 1887), p. 23. [J42a,6] 



Souday tries to dismiss the Christian velleities of Baudelaire with a reference to 
Pascal. [J42a,7] 

Kafka says: dependency keeps you young. [J42a,8] 

"Tliis sensation is then renewed ad infinitum through astonishment. . . . All of a 
sudden, Baudelaire draws hack from what is most familiar to him and eyes it in 
horror. . . . He draivs bach from himself; he looks upon himself as something quite 
new and prodigiously interesting, although a little unclean: 'Lord give me strength 
and courage to behold / My body and my heart without disgust!"' 208 Paul Des- 
jardins, "Charles Baudelaire," Revue bleue (Paris, 1887), p. 18. [J42a,9] 

Baudelaire's fatalism: "At the time of the coup d'etat in December, he felt a sense 
of outrage. 'What a disgrace!' he cried at first; then he came to see things 'from a 
providential perspective' and resigned himself like a monk." Desjardins, "Charles 
Baudelaire," Revue bleue (1887), p. 19. [J42a,10] 

Baudelaire — according to Desjardins — unites the sensibility of the Marquis de 
Sade with the doctrines of Jansenius. [ J43.1] 

"True civilization . . . has nothing to do with . . . table-turning" 209 — an allusion to 
Hugo. [J43.2] 

"Que diras-tu ce soir . . ." <What Will You Say Tonight . . .> invoked as the poem 
of a "man in whom a decided aptitude for the most arduous speculations did not 
exclude a poetry that was solid, warm, colorful, essentially original and humane." 
Charles Barhara, L'Assassinat du Pont-Rouge (Paris, 1859), p. 79 (the sonnet, 
pp. 82-83). [J43.3] 

Barres: "In him the simplest word betrays the effort by which he attained so high 
a level." Cited in Gide, "Baudelaire et M. Faguet," ISouvelle Revue franqaise 
(Novemher 1, 1910), p. 513. 210 [J43,4] 

"A phrase of Brunetiere's is even more to our purpose: '. . . He lacks animation 
and imagination.' . . . Agreed that he lacks animation and imagination. . . . The 
question arises (since, after all, we do have Les Fleurs du mal) whether it is indeed 
essentially the imagination which makes the poet; or, since MM. Faguet and 
Brunetiere certainly are in favor of giving the name of poetry to a kind of versified 
oratory, whether we would not do well to hail Baudelaire as something other and 
more than a poet: the first artist in poetry." Andre Gide, "Baudelaire et 
M. Faguet," Nouvelle Revue franqaise, 2 (Novemher 1, 1910), pp. 513-514. Gide 



quotes, in connection with this, Baudelaire's formula, "The imagination, that 
queen of the faculties," and concedes that the poet was unaware of the true state of 
affairs (p. 517). 2 " [J43.5] 



"The seeming inappropriateness of terms, which will irritate some critics so much, 
that skillful impreciseness of which Racine already made such masterly use, . . . 
that air-space, that interval, hetween image and idea, hetween the word and the 
thing, is just where there is room for the poetic emotion to come and dwell." 
A. Gide, "Baudelaire et M. Faguet," Nouvelle Revue franqaise, 2 (Novemher 1, 
1910), p. 512. 212 [J43,6] 



"Enduring fame is promised only to those writers who can offer to successive 
generations a nourishment constantly renewed; for every generation arrives on 
the scene with its own particular hunger." A. Gide, "Baudelaire et M. Faguet," 
Nouvelle Revue franqaise, 2 (November 1, 1910), p. 503. 213 [J43.7] 



Faguet complains of the lack of movement in Baudelaire, and Gide, making refer- 
ence to Baudelaire's "I hate all movement" and to the iterative poems, remarks: 
"As if the greatest novelty of his art had not heen to immobilize his poems, to 
develop them in depth!" Gide, "Baudelaire et M. Faguet," Nouvelle Revue 
franqaise, 2 (November 1, 1910), pp. 507, 508. 21 1 [J43.8] 

Of the line, "Limp arms ..." Proust says, in the preface to <Paul Morand,> 
Tendres Stocks <Paris, 1921>, p. 15, that it sounds like something from Racine's 
Britannicus™ — The heraldic character of the image! [J43a,l] 

Very astute judgment by Proust on Sainte-Beuve's behavior toward Baudelaire, 
in the preface to Tendres Stocks. 216 [J43a,2] 



Of those "tunes . . . granting a kind of glory to the crowd," Proust remarks (<"A 
Propos de Baudelaire," Nouvelle Revue franqaise [June 1, 1921], > p. 646): "It 
would seem impossible to better that." 217 [ J43a,3] 



"I have not had time to speak here of the part played in Baudelaire's work hy 
ancient cities, or of the scarlet note they strike, here and there, in the fabric of his 
poetry." Marcel Proust, "A Propos de Baudelaire," Nouvelle Revue franqaise 
(June 1, 1921), p. 656. 218 [J43a,4] 



Proust thinks that the concluding lines of both <Racine's> Andromache and 
<Baudelaire's> "Le Voyage" fall Hat. He is offended hy the extreme simplicity of 
these endings. 2W [J43a,5] 



"A capital is not wholly necessary to man." Senancour, Oberrnann, ed. Fasquelle 
(Paris <1901>), p. 248. 22 " [J43a,6] 



"He was the first ... to show the woman in her bedroom, in the midst not only of 
her jewels and perfumes, but of her makeup, her linens, her dresses, trying to 
decide if she prefers a scalloped hem or a straight hem. He compares her ... to 
animals — to the elephant, the monkey, and the snake." John Charpentier, "La 
Poesie britannique et Baudelaire," Mercure de France, 147 (May 1, 1921), p. 673. 

[J43a,7] 

On allegory: "His greatest glory, wrote Theophile Gautier [in the preface to the 
1863 edition of Les Fleurs du mal], 'will he to have introduced into the realm of 
stylistic possibilities whole classes of objects, sensations, and effects left unnamed 
by Adam, the great nomenclator.' He names . . . the hopes and regrets, the curiosi- 
ties and fears, that seethe in the darkness of the inner world." John Charpentier, 
"La Poesie britannique et Baudelaire," Mercure de France, 14 7 (May 1, 1921), 
p. 674. [J43a,8] 

"L'Invitation au voyage," translated into Russian by Merezhkovski, became a 
gypsy romance entitled "Holubka mo'ia." ( J43a,9] 

In connection with "L'Irremediable," Crepet (Les Fleurs du mal, ed. Jacques 
Crepet [Paris, 1931], p. 449) cites the following passage from Les Soirees de Saint- 
Petersbourg: "That river which one crosses but once; that pitcher of the 
Danaides, alivays full and ahvays empty; that liver of Tityus, always regenerated 
under the beak of the vulture that alivays devours it anew, . . . — these are so many 
speaking hieroglyphs, about which it is impossible to be mistaken." 221 [ J43a,10] 

Letter to Calonne, director of La Revue contemporaine, on February 11, 1859: 
"The dance of death is not a person but an allegory. It seems to me that it should 
not he capitalized. An extremely well-known allegory." Les Fleurs du mal, ed. 
Crepet (Paris, 1931), p. 459. 222 [ J44.1] 

Regarding "L' Amour dumensonge" <Love of Deceit). From a letter to Alphonse de 
Calonne: "The word 'royal' will help the reader understand the metaphor, which 
transforms memory into a crown of towers, like those that weigh down the brows 
of the goddesses of maturity, of fertility, of tuisdom." Fleurs du mal, ed. Jacques 
Crepet (Paris, 1931), p. 461. 22i [J44,2] 

Planned cycle of poems "Oneirocritie" <Dream Interpretation): "Symptoms of 
ruin. Vast Pelasgic huildings, one on top of the other. Apartments, rooms, temples, 
galleries, stairways, caeca, belvederes, lanterns, fountains, statues. — Fissures 
and cracks. Dampness resulting from a reservoir situated near the sky. — How to 
warn people and nations'? Let us whisper warnings into the ears of the most intelli- 
gent. / High up, a column cracks and its two ends shift. Nothing has collapsed as 
yet. I can no longer find the way out. I go down, then climb back up. A tower. — 
Labyrinth. I never succeeded in leaving. I live forever in a building on the point of 
collapsing, a building undermined by a secret malady. — I reckon up in my mind, 



to amuse myself, whether such a prodigious mass of stones, marble blocks, stat- 
ues, and walls, which are all about to collide with one another, will be greatly 
sullied by that multitude of brains, human flesh, and shattered bones. — I see such 
terrible things in my dreams that sometimes I wish I could sleep no more, if only I 
could he sure of not becoming too weary." Nadar, Charles Baudelaire intime 
(Paris, 1911), pp. 136-137 [<Baudelaire, Oeuvres,> ed. Le Dantec, vol. 2, 
p. 696]. 22 ' 1 [J44,3] 

Proust on "Le Balcon": "Many of the lines in Baudelaire's 'Le Balcon' convey a 
similar impression of mystery" (p. 644). This in contrast to Hugo: "Victor Hugo 
always does wonderfully what he has to do. . . . But the fabricating — even when it 
is a fabricating of the impalpable — is always visible." Marcel Proust, "A Propos 
de Baudelaire," Nouvelle Revue franqaise, 16 (Paris, 1921), pp. 643-644. 225 

[J44,4] 

On the iterative poems: "The world of Baudelaire is a strange sectioning of time in 
which only the red-letter days can appear. This explains such frequent expressions 
as 'If some evening,' and so on." M. Pronst, "A Propos de Baudelaire," Nouvelle 
Revue franqaise, 16 (June 1, 1921), p. 652. 226 [J44,5] 

Meryon's letter of March 31, 1860, to Nadar: he does not wish to be photographed 
by him. [J44,6] 

"As to Baudelaire's 'stage properties' — . . . they might provide a useful lesson for 
those elegant ladies of the past twenty years, who . . . would do well to consider, 
when they contemplate the alleged purity of style which they have achieved with 
such infinite trouble, that a man may be the greatest and most artistic of writers, 
yet describe nothing but beds with 'adjustable curtains' ('Pieces condamnees'), 
halls like conservatories ('Une Martyre'), beds filled with subtle scents, sofas deep 
as tombs, whatnots loaded with flowers, lamps burning so briefly ('Pieces condam- 
nees') that the only light comes from the coal fire. Baudelaire's world is a place to 
which, at rare moments, a perfumed breeze from the outer air brings refreshment 
and a sense of magic, . . . thanks to those porticoes . . . 'open onto unknown skies' 
('La Mort'), or 'wliich the suns of the sea tinged with a thousand fires' ('La Vie 
anterieure')." M. Proust, "A Propos de Baudelaire," Nouvelle Revue franqaise, 
16 (June 1, 1921), p. 652. 227 [J44a,l] 

On the "Pieces condamnees": "They take their place once more among the grand- 
est poems in the book, like those crystal-clear waves that heave majestically after 
a night of storm, and, by interposing their crests between the spectator and the 
immense sweep of the ocean, give a sense of space and distance to the view." 
Proust, "A Propos de Baudelaire," Nouvelle Revue franqaise, 16 (June 1, 1921), 
p. 655. 22 " [J44a,2] 



"How did he come to be so interested in lesbians . . . ? When Vigny, raging against 
women, thought to lind the explanation of the mystciry of their sex in the fact that 



women give suck . . . , in their psychology ('Always the companion whose heart is 
untrue'), it is easy to see why, in his frustrated and jealous passion, he could write: 
'Woman will have Gomorrah, and Man will have Sodom . ' But he does, at least, see 
the two sexes at odds, facing each other as enemies across a great gulf. . . . But this 
did not hold true of Baudelaire. . . . This 'connection' between Sodom and Go- 
morrah is what, in the final section of my novel, . . . I have shown in the person of 
a brutish creature, Charles Morel (it is usually to brutish creatures that this part 
is allotted). But it would seem that Baudelaire cast himself for it, and looked on the 
role as a privilege. It would be intensely interesting to know why he chose to 
assume it, and how well he acquitted himself. What is comprehensible in a Charles 
Morel becomes profoundly mysterious in the author of Les Fleurs du mal. " Marcel 
Proust, "A Propos de Baudelaire," ISouvelle Revue frangaise, 16 (June 1, 1921), 
pp. 655-656. 22 '' [J44a,3] 

Louis Menard — who, under the pseudonym Louis de Senneville, had published 
Frometh.ee delivre <Prometheus Unbound) — in La Revue philosophique et re- 
ligieuse of September 1857 (cited in Les Fleurs du mal, ed. Crepet [Paris, 1930], 
pp. 362-363): "Though he talks incessantly of the vermin and scorpions in his soul 
and takes himself for the avatar of all vices, it is easy to see that his principal 
defect is an overly libertine imagination — a defect all too common among those 
erudite persons who have passed their youth in seclusion. . . . Let him enter into 
the community of human life, and he will be able to find a characteristically ele- 
vated form for vihrant, wholesome creations. He will he a paterfamilias and will 
publish books of the sort that could be read to his children. Until then, he will 
remain a schoolboy of 1828, suffering from what Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire calls ar- 
rested development." [J45,l] 

From the summation delivered by M. Pinard: "I portray evil with its intoxica- 
tions, you say, but also with its miseries and shames. So be it. But what of all those 
many readers for whom you write (for you publish thousands of copies of your 
book, and at a low price) those numerous readers of every class, age, and condi- 
tion? Will they take the antidote of which you speak with such complacency?" 
Cited in Les Fleurs du mal, cd. Crepet (Paris, 1930), p. 334. [J45,2] 

An article by Louis Goudall in Le Figaro of November 4, 1855, opens the way for 
criticisms of "university pedants." Goudall writes, after the publication of poems 
in La Revue des deux mondes: "After the fading of his surprise celebrity, Baudelaire 
will be associated exclusively with the withered fruits of contemporary poetry." 
Cited in Les Fleurs du mal, ed. Crepet (Paris, 1930), p. 306. [J45.3] 

In 1850, Asselineau saw Baudelaire with a copy of the poems inscribed by a callig- 
rapher and bound in two gilded quarto volumes. [J45,4] 



Crepet (Fleurs du mal, ed. Crepet, p. 300) says that, around 1846, many of 
Baudelaire's friends knew his poems by heart. Only three of the poems had been 
published at that point. [J45,5] 



May 1852: "Les Limbes <Limbo>: intimate poems of Georges Durant, collected and 
published by bis friend Th. Veron." [J45,6] 



Announcing Les Limbes in the second issue of L'Echo des marchands devin: "Les 
Limbes: poems by Charles Baudelaire. The book will be published on February 
24, 1849, in Paris and Leipzig." [J45.7] 

Leconte de Lisle in La Revue europeenne of December 1, 1861. Among other 
things, he speaks of "that strange mania for dressing up the discoveries of mod- 
ern industry in bad verse." He refers to Baudelaire's oeuvre as "stamped with the 
vigorous seal of long meditation. "The Inferno plays a big part in his review. Cited 
in Les Fleurs du mal, ed. Crepet, pp. 385, 386. [ J45a,l] 

Swinburne's article in The Spectator of September 6, 1862. The author was 
twenty-live years old at the time. [ J45a,2] 

Paris, for Gonzague de Reynold, as "antechamber to the Baudelairean Hell." 
Turn to the second chapter, "La Vision de Paris," in part 2 (entitled "L'Art et 
l'oeuvre") of his book Charles Baudelaire (Paris and Geneva, 1920), and you find 
nothing but a longwinded, subaltern paraphrase of certain poems. [ J45a,3] 

Villon and Baudelaire: "In the one, we find the mystical and macabre Christianity 
of an age in the process of losing its faith; in the other, the more or less secularized 
Christianity of an age seeking to recover its faith." Gonzague de Reynold, Charles 
Baudehire (Paris and Geneva, 1920), p. 220. [J45a,4] 

Reynold draws a schematic parallel between the fifteenth and the nineteenth cen- 
turies as periods of decadence, in which an extreme realism prevails alongside an 
extreme idealism, together with unrest, pessimism, and egoism. [ J45a,5] 

Imitatio Christi, book 1, paragraph 20, "De amore solitudinus et silentii": "Quid 
potes alibi videre, quod hie non vides? Ecce caelum et terra et omnia elemental 
nam ex istis omnia sunt facta." 230 [J45a,6] 

Mallarme, in the opening piece of Divagations, "Formerly, in the margins of a 
Baudelaire": "This torrent of tears illuminated by the bengal light of the artificer 
Satan, who comes from behind." Stephane Mallarme, Divagations (Paris, 1897), 
p. 60. [J45a,7] 

December 4, 1847: "After New Year's Day, I am starting a new kind of writing, . . . 
the Novel. It is not necessary for me to point out to you the gravity, the beauty, and 
the infinite possibilities of that art." Ch<arles> B<audelaire>, Lettres a sa mere 
(Paris, 1932), p. 26. 2:il [J45a,8] 



December 8, 1848: "Another reason I would be happy if you were able to comply 
with my request is that I very much fear a revolutionary uprising, and nothing is 



more deplorable than to be utterly without money at such a time." Ch. B., Lettres 
a sa mere (Paris, 1932), p. 33. 232 [J45a,9] 

"From the end of the Second Empire down to our own day, the evolution in 
philosophy and the blooming of Les Fleurs du mal have been concomitant. This 
explains the peculiar destiny of a work whose fundamental parts, though still 
enveloped in shadow, are becoming clearer with every passing day." Alfred Capus, 
Le Gaulois, 1921 (cited in Les Fleurs dumal, ed. Crepet [Paris, 1931], p. 50). 

[J46.1] 

On March 27, 1852, he mentions to his mother some "sickly articles, hastily writ- 
ten." (Charles Baudelaire,> Lettres a sa mere (Paris, 1932), p. 39. 233 [ J46.2] 

March 27, 1852: "To beget children is the only thing which gives moral intelligence 
to the female. As for young women without status and without children, they show 
nothing but coquetry, implacability, and elegant debauchery." Lettres m. sa mere 
(Paris, 1932), p. 43. 2:i ' 1 [J46,3] 

In a letter to his mother, Baudelaire refers to the reading room, in addition to the 
cafe, as a refuge in which to work. [ J46,4] 

December 4, 1854: "Should I resign myself to going to bed and staying there for 
lack of clothes?" Lettres a sa mere (Paris, 1932), p. 74. 235 (On p. 191, he asks for 
the loan of some handkerchiefs.) [J46,5] 

December 20, 1855, after toying with the idea of petitioning for a subvention: 
"Never will my name appear on filthy government paper." Lettres a sa mere, 
p. 83. 23f ' [J46.6] 

Problematic passage from a letter of July 9, 1857, concerning Les Fleurs du mal: 
"Moreover, alarmed myself by the horror I was going to inspire, I cut out a third of 
it at the proof stage." Lettres a sa mere, p. 110. 2 ' !7 [J46,7] 

Spleen de Paris appears for a time, in 1857 (see p. Ill, letter of July 9, 1857), to 
have had the title Poemes nocturnes. [J46,8] 

Planned essay (Lettres a. sa mere, p. 139) on Machiavelli and Condorcet. [ J46.9] 

May 6, 1861: '"And what about God!' you will say. I wish with all my heart (with 
what sincerity I alone can know) to believe that an exterior invisible being is 
concerned with my fate. But what can I do to make myself believe it?" Lettres a sa 
mere, p. 173. 2:i,i [J46.10] 



May 6, 1861: "I am forty years old and I cannot think of school without pain, any 
more than I can think of the fear which my stepfather inspired in me." Lettres a sa 
mere, p. 176. 2:w [J46a,l] 



July 10, 1861, on the planned cle luxe edition: "Where is the mama who will give 
Les Fleurs du mal as a present to her children? And where is the papa?" Lettres a 
sa mere, p. 186. [J46a,2] 

His eyes strained with working in the Louvre: "Two bloodshot goggle-eyes." Let- 
tres a sa mere, p. 191. [ J46a,3] 

On Les Miserables — August 11, 1862 : "The book is disgusting and clumsy. On this 
score, I've shown that I possess the art of lying." Lettres a sa mere, p. 212. 240 

[J46a,4] 

June 3, 1863. He speaks of Paris, "where I have been bored for months, as no one 
was ever bored before." Lettres a sa mere, p. 218. 241 [ J46a,5] 

Conclusion of "Crepuscule du soir": the muse herself, who turns away from the 
poet to whisper words of inspiration to the air. [ J46a,6] 

Baudelaire planned a "refutation of the preface to the life of Caesar hy Napo- 
leon III." [J46a,7] 

In a letter of May 4, 1865, Baudelaire mentions to his mother an "immensely long" 
article appearing in La Revue germanique. Lettres a sa mere, p. 260. 212 [J46a,8] 

March 5, 1866: "I like nothing so much as to be alone. But that is impossible; and 
it seems that the Baudelaire school exists." Lettres a sa mere, p. 301. 243 [J46a,9] 

December 23, 1865: "If I can ever regain the freshness and energy I've sometimes 
enjoyed, I'll assuage my wrath in horrible hooks. I'd like to set the entire human 
race against me. That offers a pleasure that could console me for everything." 
Lettres a sa mere, p. 278. 244 [ J46a,10] 

"As a man advances through life . . . , what the world has agreed to call 'beauty' 
loses much of its importance. . . . Henceforth beauty will be no more than the 
promise of happiness . . . . Beauty will he the form which promises the most kind- 
ness, the most loyalty to an oath, the most honesty in fulfilling a pledge, the most 
subtlety in understanding relationships" (p. 424). And a little further on, with 
reference to "L'Ecole paienne," to which these lines written in an album constitute 
a note: "How could I possihly succeed in convincing a young scatterhrain that no 
sensual desire is mingled with the irresistible sympathy I feel for old women — for 
those creatures who have suffered greatly through their lovers, their husbands, 
their children, and also through their own mistakes?" Ch. B., Oeuvres completes, 
ed. Le Dantec, vol. 2, pp. 424-425. 2k '> [J47.1] 



"For some time, . . . it [has seemed] t o me that I am having a bad dream, that I am 
hurtling through space and that a multitude of wooden, golden, and silver idols 
are falling with me, tumbling after me, humping into me, and breaking my head 



and back." Ch. B., Oeuvres completes, vol. 2, pp. 420-421 ("L'Ecole 
pai'enne"). 240 Compare the anecdote about Baudelaire and the Mexican idol 
<J17a,2?>. [J47,2] 



Toward the end of the Second Empire, as the regime relaxes its pressure, the 
theory of / 'art pour I'art suffers a loss in prestige. [J47,3] 

From the argument of the Guys essay, it would appear that Baudelaire's fascina- 
tion with this artist was connected above all with his handling of backgrounds, 
which differs little from the handling of backgrounds in the theater. But because 
these pictures, unlike scenery on a stage, are to be viewed from close up, the 
magic of distance is canceled for the viewer without his having to renounce 
the judgment of distance. In the essay on Guys, Baudelaire has characterized the 
gaze which here and in other places he himself turns toward the distance. Baude- 
laire dwells on the expression of the oriental courtesan: "She directs her gaze at 
the horizon, like a beast of prey; the same wildness, the same indolent distrac- 
tion, and also at times the same fixity of attention." Ch. B., Oeuvres, vol. 2, 
p. 359. 247 [J47.4] 



In his poem L'Heautontimoroumenos" <The Self -Tormentor), Baudelaire himself 
speaks of his shrill voice. [J47,5] 

A decisive value is to be accorded Baudelaire's efforts to capture the gaze in 
which the magic of distance is extinguished. (Compare "L' Amour du men- 
songe.") Relevant here: my definition of the aura as the aura of distance opened 
up with the look that awakens in an object perceived. 248 [J47.6] 



The gaze in which the magic of distance is extinguished: "Let your eyes plunge 
into the fixed stare / of satyresses or water sprites" ("L'Avertisseur" <The Look- 
out)). 2 " [J47a,l] 



Among the prose poems planned but left unwritten is "La Fin du monde." Its basic 
theme is perhaps best indicated in the following passage from "Fusees," no. 22: 
"The world is about to come to an end. The only reason it should continue is that 
it exists. What a weak argument, compared with all the arguments to the contrary, 
and especially the following: 'What, in future, is the world to do in the sight of 
heaven?' For, supposing it continued to have material existence, would this exist- 
ence be worthy of the name, or of the Encyclopedia of History? . . . For my part, I 
who sometimes feel myself cast in the ridiculous role of prophet, I know that I shall 
never receive so much as a doctor's charity. Lost in this base world, jostled by the 
mob, I am like a weary man who sees behind him, in the depths of the years, only 
disillusionment and bitterness, and in front of him only a tempest that brings 
nothing new. ... I seem to have wandered off. . . . Nevertheless, I shall let these 
pages stand — because I wish to set an exact date to my anger." Ch. B., Oeuvres, 



vol. 2, pp. 639, 641-642. 25u — In the manuscript, there is a variant for the last 
word: "sadness." [J47a,2] 



The piece that begins, "The world is coming to an end" ("Fusees" no. 22), 
contains, interwoven with the apocalyptic reverie, a frightfully bitter critique of 
Second Empire society. (It reminds one here and there, perhaps, of Nietzsche's 
delineation of "the last man") This critique displays, in part, prophetic features. 
Of the coming society, it is said that "nothing in the sanguinary, blasphemous, or 
unnatural dreams of the Utopians can be compared to what will actually hap- 
pen. . . . Rulers will be compelled, in order to maintain their position and create a 
semblance of order, to resort to methods that would appall present-day mankind, 
hardened as it is. . . . Justice — if, in d)is fortunate epoch, any justice can still 
exist — will forbid the existence of citizens who are unable to make a fortune. . . . 
Those times are perhaps quite close at hand. Who knows whether they are not 
here already — whether it is not simply the coarsening of our natures that keeps 
us from noticing what sort of atmosphere we already breathe?" Ch. B., Oeuvres, 
vol. 2, pp. 640-641. 2r " [J47a,3] 

"The gist of it all, in the eyes of history and of the French people, is that Napo- 
leon Ill's great claim to renown will have been that he showed how anybody at all, 
if only he gets hold of the telegraph and the printing presses, can govern a great 
nation. Anyone who believes that such things can be done without the people's 
permission is an imbecile." Ch. B., Oeuvres, vol. 2, p. 655 ("Mon Coeur mis a nu," 
no. 44). 252 [J48.1] 

"A sense of solitude, since my childhood. Despite my family, and especially amid 
companions — a sense of an eternally lonely destiny." Ch. B., Oeuvres, vol. 2, 
p. 645 ("Mon Coeur mis a nu"). Mi [J48.2] 

"Truth, for all its multiplicity, is not two-faced." Ch. B., Oeuvres, vol. 2, p. 63 
("Salon de 1846: Aux Bourgeois"). 254 [ J48,3] 

"Allegory is one of the noblest genres of art." Ch. B., Oeuvres, vol. 2, p. 30 
("Salon de 1845"). 255 [J48.4] 

"The will must have become a highly developed and productive faculty to he able 
to give its stamp ... to works ... of the second rank. . . . The spectator enjoys the 
effort, and his eye drinks in the sweat." Ch. B., Oeuvres, vol. 2, <p. 26> ("Salon de 
1845"). [J48.5] 

"The idea of progress. This dim heacon, an invention of contemporary philoso- 
phism, licensed without the sanction of Nature or God — this modern lantern casts 
dark shadows over every object of knowledge. Liberty vanishes; punishment dis- 
appears." Ch. B., Oeuvres, vol. 2, p. 148 ("Exposition Universale, 1855"). ' m 

[J48.6] 



"Stupidity is often the ornament of beauty. It is what gives to the eyes that gloomy 
limpidity of blackish pools and that oily calm of tropical seas." Ch. B., Oeuvres, 
vol. 2, p. 622 ("Choix de maximes consolantes sur l'amour"). 257 [ J48,7] 

"A last, general rule: in love, beware of the moon and the stars; beware of the 
Venus de Milo." Ch. B., Oeuvres, vol. 2, p. 624. ("Choix de maximes consolantes 
sur l'amour"). 258 [ J48.8] 

Baudelaire was always after the gist. His epoch forbade him to formulate it in 
such a way that its social bearing would become immediately intelligible. Where 
he sought in fact to make it comprehensible — in the essays on Dupont, as in the 
theoretical musings in a Christian vein — he instead lost sight of it. Nevertheless, 
the formulation he attains at one point in this context — "How much can you get 
for a lyre, at the pawnshop?" — gives apt expression to his insistence on an art 
that can prove itself before society. The sentence from Ch. B., Oeuvres, vol. 2, 
p. 422 ("L'Ecole paienne"). 259 [J48,9] 

With regard to allegory: "What do you expect from heaven or from the stupidity of 
the public? Enough money to raise altars to Priapus and Bacchus in your attics? 
... I understand the rage of iconoclasts and of Muslims against images. I admit all 
the remorse of Saint Augustine for the too great pleasure of the eyes." Ch. B., 
Oeuvres, vol. 2, pp. 422, 423 ("L'Ecole paienne"). 2 "" [J48a,l] 

It belongs to the physiognomic profile of Baudelaire that he fosters the gestures of 
the poet at the expense of the professional insignia of the writer. In this, he is like 
the prostitute who cultivates her physiognomy as sexual object or as "beloved" in 
order to conceal her professional dealings. [J48a,2] 

If the poems of Les Epaves, in Proust's great image, 261 are the foamy wave crests in 
the ocean of Baudelairean poetry, then the poems of "Tableaux parisiens" are its 
safe harbor. In particular, these poems contain hardly any echo of the revolution- 
ary storms that were breaking over Paris. In this respect they resemble the poetry 
of Heym, composed forty years later, in which the corresponding state of affairs 
has now risen to consciousness while the "Marseillaise" has been interred. The 
last two tercets of the sonnet "Berlin III," which describes the sunset in Berlin in 
winter, read as follows: 

A paupers' graveyard upheaves black, stone after stone; 
The dead look out on the red sunset 
From their hole. It tastes like strong wine. 

They sit knitting all along the wall, 
Sooty caps on their naked temples, 
To the old attack song, the "Marseillaise." 



GeorgHeym, Dichtungen (Munich, 1922), p. 11. 



[J48a,3] 



A decisive line for the comparison with Blanqui: "When earth becomes a trick- 
ling dungeon" ("Spleen IV") , 262 [ J48a,4] 



The idea of the immobilization of nature appears, perhaps as refuge for the 
prescient imagination immediately before the war, in poems by Georg Heym, 
whose images the spleen of Baudelaire could not yet have touched: "But the seas 
congeal. On the waves / The ships hang rotting, morose." Georg Heym, Dich- 
tungen (Munich, 1922), p. 73 (collection entitled Umbra vitae). [J48a,5] 

It would be a big mistake to see in the theoretical positions on art taken by 
Baudelaire after 1852 — positions which differ so markedly from those of the 
period around 1848 — the fruits of a development. (There are not many artists 
whose work attests so little to a development as that of Baudelaire.) These 
positions represent theoretical extremes, of which the dialectical mediation is 
given by Baudelaire's whole oeuvre, without being entirely present to his con- 
scious reflection. The mediation resides in the destructive and purificatory char- 
acter of the work. This art is useful insofar as it destroys. Its destructive fury is 
directed not least at the fetishistic conception of art. Thus it serves "pure" art, in 
the sense of a purified art. [ J 4 9,1] 

The first poems of Les Flairs du mal are all devoted to the figure of the poet. From 
them it emerges, precisely insofar as the poet makes appeal to a station and a 
task, that society no longer has such things to confer. [ J49,2] 

An examination of those places where the "I" appears in the poems of Baudelaire 
might result in a possible classificatory grouping. In the first five poems of Les 
Flews du mal, it surfaces but a single time. And further on, it is not unusual to 
find poems in which the "I" does not occur. More essential — and, at the same 
time, more deliberate — is the way in other poems, like "Reversibilite" or "Har- 
monie du soir," it is kept in the background. [ J49,3] 

"La Belle Dorothee" — she must buy back her eleven-year-old sister. 263 [J49.4] 

"I assure you that the seconds are now strongly accented, and rush out of the clock 
crying, 'I am Life, unbearable and implacable Life!'" Ch. B., Oeuvres, vol. 1, 
p. 411 ("La Chambre double"). 251 [J49,5] 

From "Quelques mots d'introduction" to the "Salon de 1845": "And at the very 
outset, with reference to that impertinent designation, 'the bourgeois,' we beg to 
state that we in no way share the prejudices of our great confreres in the world of 
art, who for some years now have been striving their utmost to cast anathema upon 
that inoffensive being. . . . And, finally, the ranks of the artists themselves contain 
so many hourgeois that it is better, on the whole, to suppress a word which does not 
deline any particular vice of caste." Oeuvres, vol. 2, pp. 15-16. 2f,:j The same ten- 
dency in the preface, "Aux Bourgeois," of the "Salon de 1846." [J49,6] 



The figure of the lesbian woman belongs among Baudelaire's heroic exemplars. 
[He himself gives expression to this in the language of his satanism. It would be 
no less comprehensible in an unmetaphysical critical language.] The nineteenth 
century began openly and without reserve to include the woman in the process 
of commodity production. The theoreticians were united in their opinion that 
her specific femininity was thereby endangered; masculine traits must necessarily 
manifest themselves in women after a while. Baudelaire affirms these traits. At 
the same time, however, he seeks to free them from the domination of the 
economy. Hence the purely sexual accent which he comes to give this develop- 
mental tendency in woman. The paradigm of the lesbian woman bespeaks the 
ambivalent position of "modernity" vis-a-vis technological development. (What 
he could not forgive in George Sand, presumably, was her having profaned, 
through her humanitarian convictions, this image whose traits she bore. Baude- 
laire says that she was worse than Sade.) 26(i [ J49a,l] 

The concept of exclusive rights was not so widely accepted in Baudelaire's day as 
it is today. Baudelaire often republished his poems two or three times without 
having anyone take offense. He ran into difficulties with this only toward the end 
of his life, with the Petits Poemes en prose. [ J49a,2] 

From his seventeenth year, Baudelaire led the life of a <litterateur?>. One cannot 
say that he ever thought of himself as an "intellectual" or engaged himself on 
behalf of "the life of the mind." The registered trademark for artistic production 
had not yet been invented. (In this situation, moreover, his imperious need to 
distinguish himself and withdraw worked to his advantage.) He refused to go 
along with the defamation of the bourgeois, under the banner of which there was 
mobilized a solidarity of artists and men of letters that he considered suspect. 
Thus, in the "Musee classique du Bazar Bonne-Nouvelle" <Classical Museum of 
the Good-News Bazaao {Oeiwres, vol. 2, p. 61), he writes: "The bourgeois, who 
has few scientific notions, goes where the loud voice of the bourgeois artist 
directs him. — If this voice were suppressed, the grocer would carry E. Delacroix 
around in triumph. The grocer is a great thing, a divine being whom it is neces- 
sary to respect, homo bonae voluntatis!" 267 In more detail a year earlier, in the 
preface to the "Salon de 1845." [J49a,3] 

Baudelaire's eccentric individuality was a mask under which he tried to con- 
ceal — out of shame, you could say — the supra-individual necessity of his way of 
life and, to a certain extent, his life history. [J 50,1] 

To interrupt the course of the world — that was Baudelaire's deepest intention. 
The intention of Joshua. [Not so much the prophetic one: for he gave no thought 
to any sort of reform.] From this intention sprang his violence, his impatience, 
and his anger; from it, too, sprang the ever-renewed attempts to cut the world to 
the heart [or sing it to sleep]. In this intention he provided death with an accom- 
paniment: his encouragement of its work. [J50.2] 



Apropos of "Harmonie du soir" and other iterative poems: Baudelaire notes in 
Poe "repetitions of the same line or of several lines, insistent reiterations of 
phrases which simulate the obesssions of melancholy or of a fixed idea." "Notes 
nouvelles sur Edgar Poe," in ISouvelles Histoires extraordinaires (Paris <1886>), 
p. 22. 26 " Immobilization! [J50.3] 

"Lord give me strength and courage to behold / my body and my heart without 
disgust!" With this, juxtapose: "The dandy should aspire to be sublime, continu- 
ally. He should live and sleep in front of a mirror." Oeuvres, vol. 2, p. 643 ("Mon 
Coenr mis a nn," no. 5). The lines of verse are from "Un Voyage a Cy there." 2 * 9 

[J50.4] 

The close of "La Destruction" (published in 1855 under the title "La Volupte"!) 
presents the image of petrified unrest. ("Was like a Medusa-shield, / image of 
petrified unrest" — Gottfried Keller, "Verlorenes Recht, verlorenes Gluck.") 

[J50.5] 

On "Le Voyage," opening stanza: the dream of distance belongs to childhood. 
The traveler has seen the far distant, but has lost the belief in distance. [ J50,6] 

Baudelaire — the melancholic, whose star pointed him into the distance. He didn't 
follow it, though. Images of distance appear [in his poems] only as islands loom- 
ing out of the sea of long ago, or the sea of Paris fog. These islands are seldom 
lacking in the Negress. And her violated body is the figure in which the distance 
lays itself at the feet of what Baudelaire found near: the Paris of the Second 
Empire. [J50.7] 

The eye growing dim at the moment of death is the 6V-phenomenon of expiring 
appearance <Schein>. [ J50,8] 

"Les Petites Vieilles" <The Little Old Women): "Their eyes . . . glint like holes 
where water sleeps at night." 27 ' [J50,9] 

Baudelaire's violent temper belongs together with his destructive animus. We get 
nearer the matter when we recognize here, too, in these bursts of anger, a 
"strange sectioning of time." 271 [J50a,l] 

Baudelaire, in his best passages, is occasionally coarse — never sonorous. His 
mode of expression at these points deviates as little from his experience as the 
gestures of a perfect prelate deviate from his person. [J50a,2] 

Although the general contours were by then already lost to view, the concept of 
allegory in the first third of the nineteenth century did not have the disconcerting 
quality that attaches to it today. In his review of Les Poesies de Joseph Delorme, in 
Le Globe of April 11, 1829, Charles Magnin brings together Victor Hugo and 



Sainte-Beuve with the words: "They both proceed almost continually by figures, 
allegories, symbols." <Cited in Charles Augustin Sainte-Beuve,> Vie, poesies et 
pensees de Joseph Delorme (Paris, 1863), vol. 1, p. 295. [J50a,3] 

A comparison between Baudelaire and Sainte-Beuve can unfold only within the 
narrow confines of subject matter and poetic workmanship. For Sainte-Beuve 
was a genial and indeed cozy sort of author. Charles Magnin justly writes in Le 
Globe of April 11, 1829: "His spirit might cloud over for a while, but no sooner 
does it compose itself than a fund of natural benevolence rises to the surface." 
(Here, it is not the benevolence but the surface that is decisive.) "Without doubt, 
this is the source of that sympathy and indulgence which he inspires in us." 
<Cited in> Vie, poesies et pensees de Joseph Delorme (Paris, 1863), vol. 1, p. 294. 

[J50a,4] 

Miserable sonnet by Sainte-Beuve (Les Consolations [Paris, 1863], pp. 262-263) : 
"I love Paris and its beautiful sunsets of autunm," with the closing lines : "And I 
depart, in my thoughts mingling / Paris with an Ithaca of beautiful sunsets." 

[J50a,5] 



Charles Magnin in his review of Les Poesies de Joseph Delorme, in Le Globe, April 
11, 1829: "Doubtless the alexandrine with a variable caesura calls for a stricter 
rhyme." <Cited in> Vie, poesies et pensees de Joseph Delorme (Paris, 1863), vol. 1, 
p. 298. [J50a,6] 

Conception of the poet, according tojoseph Delorme: "The idea of consorting 
with elect beings who sing of their sorrows here below, the idea of groaning in 
harmony to their lead, came to him like a smile amid his suf ferings and lightened 
them a little." Vie, poesies et pensees de Joseph Delorme (Paris, 1863), vol. 1, p. 16. 
The book has an epigraph from Obermann; this fact sets a limit to the influence 
which Obermann could have exercised on Baudelaire. [J51,l] 

Sainte-Beuve, notes Charles Magnin, half approving and half deploring, "de- 
lights in a certain crudity of expression, and abandons himself ... to a sort of 
linguistic shamelessness. . . . The harshest word, however shocking, is almost 
always the word he prefers." Le Globe, April 11, 1829, cited in Vie, poesies et 
pensees de Joseph Delorme (Paris, 1863), vol. 1, p. 296. Close on this (p. 297), 
Magnin reproaches the poet for having presented the girl in the poem "Ma 
Muse" as a consumptive: "We would not mind if the poet showed us his muse 
poor, grieving, or ill-clad. But consumptive!" The consumptive Negress in 
Baudelaire. We get some idea of Sainte-Beuve 's innovations from lines like 
"nearby, the opening of a ravine: / A girl washes threadbare linen there day after 
day" ("Ma Muse," in vol. 1 , p. 93), or, from a suicide fantasy, "Some local fellows, 
I ... I Mixing jeers with their stupid stories, / Will chat idly over my blackened 
remains /Before packing them off to the graveyard in a wheelbarrow" ("Le 
Creux de la vallee," in vol. 1, p. 114). [J51,2] 



Sainte-Beuve's characterization of his own poetry: "I have endeavored ... to be 
original in my fashion, which is humble and bourgeois, . . . calling by their name 
the things of private life, hut preferring the thatched cottage to the boudoir." Vie, 
poesies et pensees de Joseph Delorme (Paris, 1863), vol. 1, p. 170 ("Pensees," no. 
19). [J51.3] 

With Sainte-Beuve, a standard of sensibility: "Ever since our poets, . . . instead of 
saying 'a romantic grove,' a 'melancholy lake,' . . . started saying 'a green grove' 
and 'a blue lake,' alarm has been spreading among the disciples of Madame de 
Stael and the Genevan school; and already complaints can be heard about the 
invasion of a new materialism. . . . Above all, there is a dread of monotony, and it 
seems far too easy and far too simple to say that the leaves are green and the 
waves blue. On this point, perhaps, the adversaries of the picturesque deceive 
themselves. The leaves, in fact, are not always green; the waves not always blue. 
Or rather, we find in nature . . . neither green, nor blue, nor red, properly speak- 
ing; the natural colors of things are colors without names. . . . The picturesque is 
not a box of paints that can be emptied." <Sainte-Beuve, Vie, poesies et pensees de 
Joseph Delorme (Paris, 1863),) pp. 166-167 ("Pensees," no. 16). [J51,4] 

"The alexandrine . . . resembles somewhat a pair of tongs, gleaming and golden, if 
straight and rigid; it is not for rummaging about in nooks and crannies. — Our 
modern verse is to a degree partitioned and articulated in the manner of insects, 
but, like them, it has wings." Vie, poesies et pensees de Joseph Delorme (Paris, 
1863), vol. 1, p. 161 ("Pensees," no. 9). [J51a,l] 

The sixth of Joseph Delorme's pensees assembles a number of examples and 
prefigurations of the modern alexandrine, from Rotrou, Chenier, Lamartine, 
Hugo, and Vigny. It notes that they are all informed by "the full, the large, the 
copious." Typical is this verse by Rotrou: "I myself have seen them — [the Chris- 
tians] looking so serene — / Driving their hymns to the skies in bulls of bronze" 
(p. 154). [J51a,2] 

"The poetry of Andre Chenier ... is, as it were, the landscape for which La- 
martine has done the sky." Delorme, vol. 1, pp. 159-160 ("Pensees," no. 8). 

[J51a,3] 

In the preface of February 1829, Sainte-Beuve provides the poetry of Joseph 
Delorme with a more or less exact social index. He lays weight on the fact that 
Delorme comes from a good family, and even more on his poverty and the 
humiliations to which it has exposed him. [J51a,4] 

What I propose is to show how Baudelaire lies embedded in the nineteenth 
century. Trie imprint he has left behind there must stand out clear and intact, like 
that of a stone which, having lain in the ground for decades, is one day rolled 
from its place. [J51a,5] 



Hie unique importance of Baudelaire resides in his being the first and the most 
unflinching to have taken the measure of the self -estranged human being, in the 
double sense of acknowledging this being and fortifying it with armor against the 
reified world. 272 tJ51a,6] 

Nothing comes closer to the task of the ancient hero in Baudelaire's sense — and 
in his century — than to give a form to modernity. [ J51a,7] 

In the "Salon de 1846" {Oeuvres, vol. 2, p. 134), Baudelaire has described his 
social class through the clothes they wear. From this description it emerges that 
heroism is a quality of the one who describes, and not at all a quality of his 
subject. The "heroism of modern life" is a subterfuge or, if you prefer, a euphe- 
mism. The idea of death, from which Baudelaire never broke loose, is the hollow 
matrix readied for a knowledge that was not his. Baudelaire's concept of heroic 
modernity, it would seem, was first of all this : a monstrous provocation. Analogy 
with Daumier. [ J 5 2 , 1 ] 

Baudelaire's truest posture is ultimately not that of Hercules at rest but that of the 
mime who has taken off his makeup. This gestus is found again in the "ebbings" 
of his prosodic construction — something that, for several commentators, is the 
most precious element of his ars poetica. [ J52,2] 



January 15, 1866, on he Spleen de Paris: "Finally, I am hopeful that one of these 
clays I'll he able to show a new Joseph Delorme linking his rhapsodic meditation to 
every chance event in his flanerie." Ch<arles> B<audelaire>, Lettres (Paris, 1915), 
p. 493. 2 " 3 [J52.3] 



January 15, 1866, to Sainte-Beuve: "In certain places in Joseph Delorme I find a 
few too many lutes, lyres, harps, and Jehovahs. This clashes with the Parisian 
poems. Moreover, you'd come with the aim of destroying all that." Ch. B., Lettres 
(Paris, 1915), p. 495."'» [J52,4] 

An image that Baudelaire summons to explain his theory of the short poem, 
particularly the sonnet, in a letter to Armand Fraisse of February 19, 1860, serves 
better than any other description to suggest the way the sky looks in Meryon: 
"Have you ever noticed that a section of the sky seen through a vent or between 
two chimneys or two rocks, or through an arcade, gives a more profound idea of 
the infinite than a great panorama seen from a mountaintop?" Ch. B., Lettres 
(Paris, 1915), pp. 238-239. 275 [J52.5] 



Apropos of Pinelli, in "Quelques caricaturistes etrangers": "I wish that someone 
would invent a neologism, that someone would manufacture a word destined to 
destroy once and for all this species ofponcif — the poncif in conduct and behavior, 



which creeps into the life of artists as into their works." Ch. B., Oeuvres, vol. 2, 
p. 211.™ [J52.6] 



Baudelaire's use of the concept "allegory" is not always entirely sure: "the . . . 
allegory of the spider weaving her web between the arm and the line of a fisher- 
man, whose impatience never causes him to stir." Ch. B., Oeuvres, vol. 2, p. 204 
("Quelques caricaturistes etrangers"). 277 [J52a,l] 

Against the proposition "The genius makes his way." Ch. B., Oeuvres, vol. 2, 
p. 203 ("Quelques caricaturistes etrangers"). [J52a,2] 

About Gavarni: "Like all men of letters — being a man of letters himself — he is 
slightly tainted with corruption." Ch. B., Oeuvres, vol. 2, p. 199 ("Quelques cari- 
caturistes francais"). 27 " [J52a,3] 

In "Quelques caricaturistes fran§ais," on a drawing by Daumier dealing with 
cholera: "True to its ironic custom in times of great calamity and political up- 
heaval, the sky of Paris is superb; it is quite white and incandescent with heat. . . . 
The square is deserted and like an oven — more desolate, even, than a populous 
square after a riot." Ch. B., Oeuvres, vol. 2, p. 193. 279 [J52a,4] 

In Le Globe of March 15, 1830, Duvergier de Hauranne writes of Les Consola- 
tions: "It is not at all certain that the Posillipo has not inspired M. Sainte-Beuve as 
much as his Boulevard d'Enf er" (<cited in Sainte-Beuve, Les Consolations [Paris, 
1863],> p. 114). [J52a,5] 

Critique of Joseph Delorme and Les Consolations by Farcy, a July insurgent who 
fell in battle shortly after composing these lines: "Lihertinism is poetic when it is a 
transport of impassioned principle in us, when it is audacious philosophy, but not 
when it is merely a furtive aberration, a shameful confession. This state of mind 
... ill accords . . . with the poet, who should always go along unaffected, with head 
held high, and who requires enthusiasm, or the bitter depths of passion." From 
the manuscript published by C. A. Sainte-Beuve in Les Consolations: Pensees 
d'aoilt (Paris, 1863), p. 125. [J52a,6] 

From the critique of Sainte-Beuve by Farcy: "If the crowd is intolerable to him, 
the vastness of space oppresses him even more, a situation that is less poetic. He 
has not shown the pride or the range to take command of all this nature, to listen 
to it, understand it, and render its grand spectacles." "He was right," comments 
Sainte-Beuve (p. 126). C. A. Sainte-Beuve, Les Consolations: Pensees d'aout 
[Poesies de Sainte-Beuve, part 2] (Paris, 1863), p. 125. [ J52a,7] 



Baudelaire's oeuvre has perhaps gained importance — moral as well as literary — 
through the fact that he left no novel. [ J52a,8] 



The mental capacities that matter in Baudelaire are "souvenirs" of the human 
being, somewhat the way medieval allegories are souvenirs of the gods. "Baude- 
laire," Claudel once wrote, "takes as his subject the only inner experience left to 
people of the nineteenth century — namely, remorse." Now, this very likely paints 
too rosy a picture: remorse was no less past its time than other inner experiences 
formerly canonized. Remorse in Baudelaire is merely a souvenir, like repentance, 
virtue, hope, and even anguish, which was overtaken the moment it relinquished 
its place to morne incuriosite <glum indifference)." 280 [J53.1] 

As Baudelaire, after 1850, took up the doctrine of I'art pour I'art, he explicitly 
carried through a renunciation which he had undertaken in sovereign spirit at the 
very instant he made allegory into the armature of his poetry: he gave up using 
art as category of the totality of existence. [ J53.2] 

The brooder, whose startled gaze falls on the fragment in his hand, becomes an 
allegorist. [J53.3] 

If we call to mind just how much Baudelaire as a poet had to respect his own 
precepts, his own insights, his own taboos, and how strictly circumscribed, on the 
other hand, the tasks of his poetic labor were, then we may come to see in him a 
heroic trait. There is no other book of poems in which the poet as such presents 
himself with so little vanity and so much force. This fact provides a basis for the 
frequent comparison with Dante. [ J53,4] 

What proved so fascinating to Baudelaire in late Latin literature, particularly in 
Lucan, may have been the use this literature made of the names of gods — a 
practice in which it prepared the way for allegory. Usener discusses this. 281 

[J53.5] 

Scenes of horror in Lucan: the Thessalian witch Erichtho, and the profanation of 
the dead (<Bellum civile,> book 5, lines 507-569); the desecration of the head of 
Pompey (hook 8, lines 663-691); Medusa (book 9, lines 624-653). [J53.6] 

"Le Coucher d u soleil romantique" 282 — landscape a s allegory. [ J 5 3 , 7 ] 

Antiquity and Christianity together determine the historical armature of the 
allegorical mode of perception; they provide the lasting rudiments of the first 
allegorical experience — that of the High Middle Ages. "The allegorical outlook 
has its origin in the conflict between the guilt-laden physis, held up as an example 
by Christianity, and a purer natura deorum [nature of the gods], embodied in the 
Pantheon. With the revival of paganism in the Renaissance, and of Christianity 
in the Counter-Reformation, allegory, the form of their conflict, also had to be 
renewed" (< Walter Benjamin,> Ursprung des deutschen Trauerspiels [Berlin, 1928], 
p. 226). 283 In Baudelaire's case, the matter is clarified if we reverse the formula. 
The allegorical experience was primary for him; one can say that he appropri- 



ated from the antique world, as from the Christian, no more dian he needed to 
set going in his poetry that primordial experience — which had a substrate en- 
tirely sui generis. [J53a,l] 



The passion for ships and for self-propelled toys is, widi Baudelaire, perhaps only 
another expression of the discredit into which, in his view, the world of the 
organic has fallen. A sadistic inspiration is palpable here. [J53a,2] 

"All the miscreants of melodrama — accursed, damned, and fatally marked with a 
grin which runs from ear to ear — are in the pure orthodoxy of laughter. . . . 
Laughter is satanic; it is thus profoundly human." Ch. B., Oeuvres, vol. 2, p. 171 
("De l'Essence du rire"). 2 '" [ J53a,3] 

It is a shock that brings someone engrossed in reverie up from the depths. 
Medieval legends invoke the state of shock peculiar to the researcher whose 
longing for more-than-human wisdom has led him to magic; the experience of 
shock is cited here as the "derisive laughter of hell." "Here . . . the muteness of 
matter is overcome. In laughter, above all, matter takes on an abundance of spirit, 
in highly eccentric disguise. Indeed, it becomes so spiritual that it far outstrips 
language. Aiming still higher, it ends in shrill laughter" {Ursprung des deutschen 
Trauerspiels, p. 227). 283 Not only was such strident laughter characteristic of 
Baudelaire; it reechoed in his ear and gave him much to think about. [J53a,4] 

Laughter is shattered articulation. [ J 5 4 , 1 ] 

On the flight of images and the theory of surprise, which Baudelaire shared with 
Poe: "Allegories become dated because it is part of their nature to shock." 280 The 
succession of allegorical publications in the Baroque represents a sort of flight of 
images. [J54,2] 

On petrified unrest and the flight of images: "The same tendency is characteristic 
of Baroque lyric. The poems have 'no forward movement, but they swell up from 
within.' If it is to hold its own against the tendency toward absorption, the 
allegorical must constantly unfold in new and surprising ways." Ursprung, p. 182 
(citing Fritz Strich) , 287 [ J54,3] 

Once the scheme of allegory has been metaphysically determined according to its 
threefold illusionary nature, as "illusion of freedom — in the exploration of what is 
forbidden; . . . illusion of independence — in the secession from the community of 
the pious; . . . illusion of infinity — in the empty abyss of evil" {Ursprung, p. 230), 288 
then nothing is easier than to assimilate whole groups of Baudelairean poems to 
diis design. The first part can be represented by the cycle "Fleurs du mal"; the 
second part, by the cycle "Revoke"; while the third could be elaborated without 
difficulty from "Spleen et ideal." [ J54,4] 



The image of petrified unrest, in the Baroque, is "the bleak confusion of Gol- 
gotha, which can be recognized as the schema underlying the allegorical figures 
in hundreds of the engravings and descriptions of the period" {Ur sprung, 
p. 232). 289 ' ' ' ' [J54.5] 

The extent of Baudelaire's impatience can be gauged from these lines in "Sonnet 
d'automne" : "My heart, on which everything jars / except the candor of the 
primitive animal." 290 [J54.6] 



Experiences emptied ont and deprived of their substance: "Last ... we / [of the] 
Muse's priesthood . . . I have drunk without thirst and eaten without hunger!" 
("L'Examen de minuit"). 291 [J54,7] 

Art appears truly bare and austere in the light of an allegorical consideration 1 . 
And on that last and terrible day, 

To escape the vengeance from above, 

He must show barns whose uttermost 

Recesses swell with ripened grain, 

And blooms whose shapes and hues will gain 

The suffrage of the Heavenly Host. 292 

"La Rancon." Compare "Le Squelette laboureur." [J54.8] 

Concerning the "strange sectioning of time," the final stanza of "L'Avertisseur": 

Despite what he may hope or plan, 
There is no moment lef t when man 
Is not subject to the constant 
Warnings of this odious Serpent. 293 

To be compared with "L'Horloge" and "Reve parisien." [J54a,l] 

About laughter: "Beguiled by ghostly laughter in the air / his reason falters, 
grasps at phantom straws." ("Sur Le Tasse en prison d'Eugene Delacroix.") 

His mirth is the reverse of Melmoth's sneer 
Or the snickering of Mephistopheles, 
licked by the lurid light of a Fury's torch 
that burns them to a crisp but leaves us cold. 

"Vers pour le portrait de M. Honore Daumier." 29 ' [J54a,2] 

The derisive laughter from the clouds in "La Beatrice." 

For I — am I not a dissonance 
in the divine accord, 



because of the greedy Irony 
which infiltrates my soul? 



"L'Heautontimoroumenos.' ,2<):> [J54a,3] 

"La Beaute" 256 — entails petrifaction, but not the unrest on which the gaze of the 
allegorist falls. [J54a,4] 

On the fetish: 

Precious minerals form her polished eyes, 
and in her strange symbolic nature where 
angel and sphinx unite, where diamond, 

gold, and steel dissolve into one light, 
shines forever, useless as a star, 
the sterile woman's icy majesty. 

"Avec ses vetements . . . " 2,J7 [J54a,5] 

"For hours? Forever! Into that splendid mane / let me braid rubies, ropes of 
pearls to bind / you indissolubly to my desire." ("La Chevelure.") 2 ' 8 [J54a,6] 

When he went to meet the consumptive Negress who lived in the city, Baudelaire 
saw a much truer aspect of the French colonial empire than did Dumas when he 
took a boat to Tunis on commission from Salvandy. [J54a,7] 

Society of the Second Empire: 

Victims in tears, the hangman glorified; 
the banquet seasoned and festooned with blood: 
the poison of power clogs the despot's veins, 
and the people kiss the knout that scourges them. 

"Le Voyage. " 2OT [J55,l] 

The clouds: "Le Voyage," section 4., stanza 3. [J55,2] 

Autumnal motif: "L'Ennemi," "L'Imprevu," "Semper Eadem." [ J55,3] 

Satan in "Les Litanies de Satan": "great king of subterranean things" — "You 
whose bright eye knows the deep arsenals / Where the huried race of metals slum- 
bers. " 300 [J55.4] 

Granier de Cassagnac's theory of the subhuman, with regard to "Abel et Cain." 

[J55.5] 



On the Christian determination of allegory: it has no place in the cycle 
"Revoke." [J55.6] 



On allegory: "L' Amour et le crane: Vieux Cul-de-lampe," "Allegorie," "Une Gra- 
vure fantastique." [J55.7] 

. . . The sky was suave, the sea serene; for me 
from now on everything was hloody and hlack 
— the worse for me — and as if in a shroud 
my heart lay buried in this allegory. 

"Un Voyage a Cythere." 3 " 1 [ J55.8] 

"Steeling my nerves to play a hero's part" ("Les Sept Vieillards"). 3112 [J55.9] 
"Les Sept Vieillards" on the subject of eternal sameness. Chorus girls. 

[J55.10] 

List of allegories: Art, Love, Pleasure, Repentance, Ennui, Destruction, the Now, 
Time, Death, Fear, Sorrow, Evil, Truth, Hope, Vengeance, Hate, Respect, Jeal- 
ousy, Thoughts. [J55.ll] 

"L' Irremediable" — catalogue of emblems. [J55,12] 

The allegories stand for that which the commodity makes of the experiences 
people have in this century. [ J55.13] 

The wish to sleep. "I hate all passion, and wit grates on me" ("Sonnet 
d'automne"). ;i0:! [J55,14] 

"A sinuous fleece ... I . . . which in darkness rivals you, 0 Night, / deep and 
spreading starless Night!" ("Les Promesses d'un visage"). m [J55,15] 

"The dizzying stairs that swallow up his soul" ("Sur Le Tasse en prison d'Eugene 
Delacroix").* 05 [J55.16] 

The affinity Baudelaire felt for late Latin literature is probably connected with his 
passion for the allegorical art that had its first flowering in the High Middle Ages. 

[J55,17] 

To attempt to judge Baudelaire's intellectual powers on the basis of his philo- 
sophical digressions, as Jules Lemaitre has done, 306 is ill-advised. Baudelaire was a 
bad philosopher, a better theorist in matters of art; but only as a brooder was he 
incomparable. He has the stereotypy in motif characteristic of the brooder, the 
imperturbability in warding off disturbance, the readiness each time to put the 
image at the beck and call of the thought. The brooder is at home among 
allegories. [J55a,l] 

The attraction which a few basic situations continually exerted on Baudelaire 
belongs to the complex of symptoms associated with melancholy. He appears to 



have been under the compulsion of returning at least once to each of his main 
motifs. [J55a,2] 



Baudelaire's allegory bears traces of the violence that was necessary to demolish 
the harmonious f acade of the world that surrounded him. [ J55a,3] 

In Blanqui's view of the world, petrified unrest becomes the status of the cosmos 
itself. The course of the world appears, accordingly, as one great allegory. 

[J55a,4] 

Petrified unrest is, moreover, the formula for Baudelaire's life history, which 
knows no development. [J55a,5] 

The state of tension subsisting between the most cultivated sensibility and the 
most intense contemplation is a mark of the Baudelairean. It is reflected theoreti- 
cally in the doctrine of correspondences and in the predilection for allegory. 
Baudelaire never attempted to establish any sort of relations between these. 
Nevertheless, such relations exist. [J55a,6] 

Misery and terror — which, in Baudelaire, have their armature in allegorical per- 
ception — have become, in Rollinat, the object of a genre. (This genre had its 
"artistic headquarters" at Le Chat Noir cafe. Its model, if you will, may be found 
in a poem like "Le Vin de l'assassin." Rollinat was one of the house poets at Le 
Chat Noir.) [ J55a,7] 

"De l'Essence du rire" contains the theory of satanic laughter, hi this essay, 
Baudelaire goes so far as to adjudge even smiling as fundamentally satanic. 
Contemporaries testified to something frightful in his own maimer of laughing. 

[J55a,8] 

That which the allegorical intention has ixed upon is sundered from the custom- 
ary contexts of life: it is at once shattered and preserved. Allegory holds fast to 
the ruins. Baudelaire's destructive impulse is nowhere concerned with the aboli- 
tion of what falls to it. (But compare "Revolte,"J55,<6>.) [J56,l] 

Baroque allegory sees the corpse only from the outside; Baudelaire evokes it 
from within. [ J56.2] 

Baudelaire's invectives against mythology recall those of the medieval clerics. He 
especially detests chubby-cheeked Cupid. His aversion to this figure has the same 
roots as his hatred for Beranger. [J56,3] 

Baudelaire regards art's workshop in itself [as a site of confusion,] as the "appara- 
tus of destruction" which the allegories so often represent. In the notes he left for 
a preface to a projected third edition of Les Fleurs du mal, he writes: "Do we show 



the public . . . the mechanism behind our effects? . . . Do we display all the rags, 
the paint, the pulleys, the chains, the alterations, the scribbled-over proof sheets — 
in short, all the horrors that make up the sanctuary of art?" Ch. B., Oeuvres, vol. 
l,p.582. M7 ' [J56.4] 

Baudelaire as mime: "Being as chaste as paper, as sober as water, as devout as a 
woman at Holy Communion, as harmless as a sacrificial lamb, I would not he 
displeased to be taken for a lecher, a drunkard, an infidel, a murderer." Ch. B., 
Oeuvres, vol. 1, p. 582 (Studies for a preface to Les Fleurs du mal). m [J56,5] 

Solely for the publication of Les Fleurs du mul and Petits Poemes en prose, Bau- 
delaire sent notices to more than twenty-five periodicals, not counting the news- 
papers. [J56,6] 

Baroque detailing of the female body: "Le Beau Navire" <The Fine Ship). To the 
contrary: "Tout entiere" <Altogether>. [ J56,7] 



Allegory: 



That it's foolish to build anything on human hearts — 
For everything cracks, yes, even love and beauty, 
Till Oblivion flings them into its hod 
And gives them over to Eternity! 



in his "Confession." 31 "' 



[J56.8] 



Fetish: "who now, from Pit to Empyrean scorned / by all hut me .../.../ my 
jet-eyed statue, angel with hrazen brows!" ("Je te donne ces vers.") 310 [J56,9] 

"Michelangelo / No man's land where every Hercules / becomes a Christ." ("Les 
Phares.")'" [J56a,l] 

"An echo repeated by a thousand labyrinths." ("Les Phares.")' 12 [J56a,2] 

"La Muse venal" shows to what degree Baudelaire occasionally saw the publica- 
tion of poems as a form of prostitution. [J56a,3] 

'"Your Christian bloodstream coursing strong / and steadfast as the copious Clas- 
sical vein." ("La Muse malade.") 3 " [J56a,4] 

In Baudelaire's case, the really decisive indication of class betrayal is not the 
integrity which forbade his applying for a govermnent grant but the incompati- 
bility he felt with the ethos of journalism. [ J56a,5] 



Allegory views existence, as it does art, under the sign of fragmentation and ruin. 
Hart pour I'art erects the kingdom of art outside profane existence. Common to 
both is the renunciation of the idea of harmonious totality in which — according 



to the doctrine of German Idealism no less than that of French eclecticism — art 
and profane existence are merged. [J56a,6] 



The portrayal of the crowd in Poe shows that the description of confusion is not 
the same as a confused description. [J56a,7] 

Rowers adorn the individual stations of this Calvary [of male sexuality]. They 
are flowers of evil. [J56a,8] 

Lcs Flairs Jii mnl is the last book of poems to have had a European-wide rever- 
beration. Before that: Ossian, and Heine's Buch der Lietler <Book of Songs>. 

[J56a,9] 

The dialectic of commodity production in advanced capitalism: the novelty of 
products — as a stimulus to demand — is accorded an unprecedented importance. 
At the same time, the eversame is manifest in mass production. 

[J56a,10] 

In Blanqui's cosmology, everything hinges on the stars, which Baudelaire ban- 
ishes from his world. [J56a,ll] 

The renunciation of the magic of distance is a decisive moment in the lyric poetry 
of Baudelaire. It has found its sovereign formulation in the first stanza of "Le 
Voyage." [J56a,12] 

It belongs to the Via Dolorosa of male sexuality that Baudelaire perceived preg- 
nancy, in some degree, as unfair competition. On the other hand, solidarity 
between impotence and sterility. [ J57.1] 

The passage in which Baudelaire speaks of his fascination with painted theatrical 
backdrops— Where? Q4a,4. [J57.2] 

Baudelaire's destructive impulse is nowhere concerned with the abolition of what 
falls to it. This is reflected in his allegory and is the condition of its regressive 
tendency. On the other hand, allegory has to do, precisely in its destructive furor, 
with dispelling the illusion that proceeds from all "given order," whether of art or 
of life: the illusion of totality or of organic wholeness which transfigures that 
order and makes it seem endurable. And this is the progressive tendency of 
allegory. [J57.3] 

Whenever humanity — aspiring af ter a purer, more innocent, more spiritual exist- 
ence than it has been granted — looked around for a token and pledge of this 
existence in nature, it generally found it in the plant or animal kingdom. Not so 
Baudelaire. His dream of such an existence disdains community with any terres- 
trial nature and holds to the clouds. Many of his poems contain cloud motifs [not 



to mention the transfiguration of Paris in "Paysage" <Landscape>]. What is most 
appalling is the defilement of the clouds ("La Beatrice"). [J57.4] 



From the perspective of spleen, the buried man is the "transcendental subject of 
history." 311 [J57,5] 

Baudelaire's financial misery is a moment of his personal Golgotha. It has Gar- 
nished, together with his erotic misery, the defining features of the image of the 
poet handed down by tradition. The Passion of Baudelaire: understood as a 
redemption. [J57.6] 

Let us emphasize the solitude of Baudelaire as a counterpart to that of Blanqui. 
The latter, too, had a "destiny eternally solitary" ("Mon Coeur mis a nu," no. 
12). su ' ' [J57,7] 

On the image of the crowd in Poe: How well can the image of the big city turn 
out when the register of its physical dangers — to say nothing of the danger to 
which it itself is exposed — is as incomplete as it is at the time of Poe or Baudelaire? 
In the crowd, we see a presentiment of these dangers. [J57.8] 

Baudelaire's readers are men. It is men who have made him famous; it is them he 
has redeemed. 11 " [J57.9] 

Baudelaire would never have written poems, if he had had merely the motives 
for doing so that poets usually have. [J57a,l] 

On impotence. Baudelaire is a "maniac, in revolt against his own impotence." 
Incapable of satisfying the sexual needs of a woman, he made a virtue of neces- 
sity in sabotaging the spiritual needs of his contemporaries. He himself did not 
fail to notice the connection, and his consciousness of this connection is seen 
most clearly in bis style of humor. It is the cheerless humor of the rebel, not for a 
moment to be confused with the geniality of scoundrels, which at that time was 
already on the rise. This type of reaction is something very French; its name, la 
rogne, is not easily rendered into other languages. 317 [J57a,2] 

It is in its transitoriness that modernity shows itself to be ultimately and most 
intimately akin to antiquity. The uninterrupted resonance which Les Flairs du 
mal has found up through the present day is linked to a certain aspect of the 
urban scene, one that came to light only with the city's entry into poetry. It is the 
aspect least of all expected. What makes itself felt through the evocation of Paris 
in Baudelaire's verse is the infirmity and decrepitude of a great city. Nowhere, 
perhaps, has this been given more perfect expression than in the poem "Crepus- 
cule du matin," which is the awakening sob of the sleeper, reproduced in the 
materials of urban life. This aspect, however, is more or less common to the 
whole cycle of "Tableaux parisiens;" it is present in the transparence of the city, as 



conjured by "Le Soleil," no less than in the allegorical evocation of the Louvre in 
"Le Cygne." [J57a,3] 



On the physiognomy of Baudelaire as that of the mime: Courbet reports that he 
looked different every day. [J57a,4] 

With the inhabitants of Romance-language nations, a refinement of the sen- 
sorium does not diminish the power of sensuous apprehension. With the Ger- 
mans, on the other hand, the refinement, the advancing cultivation of sensuous 
enjoyment is generally purchased with a decline in the art of apprehension; here, 
the capacity for pleasure loses in concentration what it gains in delicacy. (Com- 
pare the "reek of wine-casks" 318 in "Le Vm des chiffonniers.") [J57a,5] 

The eminent aptitude for pleasure on the part of a Baudelaire has nothing at all 
to do with any sort of coziness. The fundamental incompatibility of sensuous 
pleasure with what is called Gemiitlichkeit is the mark of an authentic culture of 
the senses. Baudelaire's snobbism is the eccentric repudiation of complacency, 
and his satanism is the readiness to subvert this habit of mind wherever and 
whenever it should arise. [ J 58, 1] 

The streets of Paris, in Meryon's rendering, are chasms, high above which float 
the clouds. [ J58.2] 

Baudelaire wanted to make room for his poems, and to this end he had to push 
aside others. He managed to devalue certain poetic liberties of the Romantics 
through his classical deployment of rhyme, as he devalued the traditional alexan- 
drine through his introduction of certain ebbings and points of rupture. In short, 
bis poems contained special provisions for the elimination of competitors. 

[J58.3] 

Baudelaire was perhaps the first to have had the idea of a market-oriented origi- 
nality, which just for that reason was more original in its day than any other. The 
creation of his poncif :m led him to adopt methods that were the stock in trade of 
the competition. His defamatory remarks about Musset or Beranger have just as 
much to do with this as his imitations of Victor Hugo. [ J58,4] 

The relation of the crowd to the individual comes, practically of itself, to unfold 
as a metaphor in which the differing inspirations of these two poets — Hugo and 
Baudelaire — can be grasped. Words, like images, present themselves to Hugo as 
a surging, relentless mass. With Baudelaire, in contrast, they take the side of the 
solitary who, to be sure, fades into the multitude, but not before appearing with 
singular physiognomy to one who allows her gaze to linger. [ J58,5] 

What good is talk of progress to a world sinking into rigor mortis? Baudelaire 
found the experience of such a world set down with incomparable power in the 



work of Poe, who thus became irreplaceable for him. Poe described the world in 
which Baudelaire's whole poetic enterprise had its prerogative. [J58.6] 



The idea of Baudelaire's aesthetic Passion has given to many parties in the critical 
literature on Baudelaire the character of an image d 'Epinal. These colored prints, 
as is well known, often showed scenes from the lives of saints. [ J58a,l] 

There are weighty historical circumstances making the Golgotha-way of impo- 
tence trod by Baudelaire into one marked out in advance by his society. Only this 
would explain how it was that he drew, as traveling expenses along the way, a 
precious old coin from among the accumulated treasures of this society. It was 
the coin of allegory, with the scythe-wielding skeleton on one side, and, on the 
obverse, the figure of Melancholy plunged in meditation. [ J58a,2] 

That the stars do not appear in Baudelaire is the surest indicator of that tendency 
of his poetry to dissolve illusory appearances. 320 [J58a,3] 

The key to Baudelaire's relationship with Gautier is to be sought in the more or 
less clear awareness of the younger man [?] that even in art his destructive 
impulse encounters no inviolable limit. In fact, such a limit carmot withstand the 
allegorical intention. Moreover, Baudelaire could hardly have written his essay 
on Dupont if the critique of the concept of art entailed by the latter's established 
practice had not corresponded to his own radical critique. In referring to Gautier, 
Baudelaire successfully undertook to cover up these tendencies. [J58a,4] 

In the flaneur, one might say, is reborn the sort of idler that Socrates picked out 
from the Athenian marketplace to be his interlocutor. Only, there is no longer a 
Socrates. And the slave labor that guaranteed him his leisure has likewise ceased 
to exist. [J58a,5] 

Streets of ill repute. Considering the importance of forbidden forms of sexuality 
in Baudelaire's life and work, it is remarkable that the bordello plays no role in 
either his private documents or his work. There is no counterpart, within this 
sphere, to a poem such as "Lejeu." The brothel is named but once: in "Les Deux 
Bonnes Soeurs." [J58a,6] 

For the flaneur, the "crowd" is a veil hiding the "masses." 321 [J59,2] 

That Hugo's poetry takes up the motif of table-turning is perhaps less notewor- 
thy than the fact that it was regularly composed in the presence of such phenom- 
ena. For Hugo in exile, the unfathomable, insistent swarm of the spirit world 
takes the place of the public. [ J59,3] 

The primary interest of allegory is not linguistic but optical. "Images — my great, 
my primitive passion." 322 [J59,4] 



The elaborate theorems with which the principle of "art for art's sake" was 
enunciated by its original proponents, as by subsequent literary history, ulti- 
mately come down to a specific thesis: that sensibility is the true subject of poetry. 
Sensibility is, by its nature, involved in suffering. If it experiences its highest 
concretization, its richest determination, in the sphere of the erotic, then it must 
find its absolute consummation, which coincides with its transfiguration, in the 
Passion. It will define the idea of an "aesthetic Passion." The concept of the 
aesthetic appears here with precisely the signification that Kierkegaard gives it in 
his erotology. [J59.5] 

The poetics of I' art pour I art blends seamlessly into the aesthetic Passion of Les 
Fleurs du mal. [J59.6] 

The "loss of a halo" 323 concerns the poet first of all. He is obliged to exhibit 
himself in his own person on the market. Baudelaire played this role to the hilt. His 
famous mythomania was a publicity stunt. [ J59.7] 

The new dreariness and desolation of Paris, as it is described by Veuillot, comes 
on the scene, together with the dreariness of men's attire, as an essential moment 
in the image of modernity. [J59,8] 

Mystification, with Baudelaire, is an apotropaic magic, similar to the lie among 
prostitutes. [J59.9] 

The commodity form emerges in Baudelaire as the social content of the allegori- 
cal form of perception. Form and content are united in the prostitute, as in their 
synthesis. [J59.10] 

Baudelaire perceived the significance of the mass-produced article as clearly as 
did Balzac. In this, his "Americanism," of which Laforgue speaks, has its firmest 
foundation. He wanted to create a poncif, a cliche. Lemaitre assures him that he 
succeeded. [J59a,l] 

Apropos of Valery's reflections on the situation of Baudelaire. It is important that 
Baudelaire met with competitive relations in the production of poetry. Of course, 
rivalry between poets is as old as the hills. But in the period around 1830, these 
rivalries began to be decided on the open market. It was victory in that fi eld — cind 
not the patronage of the gentry, princes, or the clergy — that was to be won. This 
condition weighed more heavily on the lyric than on other forms of poetry. The 
disorganization of styles and of poetic schools is the complement of that market, 
which reveals itself to the poet as the "public." Baudelaire was not based in any 
style, and he had no school. It was a real discovery for him that he was compet- 
ing against individuals. [J59a,2] 



Les Fleurs du mal may be considered an arsenal. Baudelaire wrote certain of his 
poems in order to destroy others written before him. [ J59a,3] 



No one ever felt less at home in Paris than Baudelaire. Every intimacy with things 
is alien to the allegorical intention. To touch on things means, for it, to violate 
them. To recognize things means, for it, to see through them. Wherever the 
allegorical intention prevails, no habits of any kind can be formed. Hardly has a 
thing been taken up than allegory has dispensed with the situation. Thing and 
situation become obsolete for allegory more quickly than a new pattern for the 
milliner. But to become obsolete means: to grow strange. Spleen lays down 
centuries between the present moment and the one just lived. It is spleen that 
tirelessly generates "antiquity." And in fact, with Baudelaire, modernity is noth- 
ing other than the "newest antiquity." Modernity, for Baudelaire, is not solely 
and not primarily the object of his sensibility; it is the object of a conquest. 
Modernity has, for its armature, the allegorical mode of vision. [J59a,4] 

The correspondence between antiquity and modernity is the sole constructive 
conception of history in Baudelaire. With its rigid armature, it excludes every 
dialectical conception. [J59a,5] 

On the phrase, "I have little to do with such things," 324 in the draft of a preface to 
Les Fleurs du mal. Baudelaire, who never founded a family, has given the word 
"familiar" in his poetry an inflection filled with meaning and with promise such 
as it never before possessed. It is like a slow, heavily laden hay wagon in which the 
poet carts to the barn everything which throughout his life he had to renounce. 
Compare "Correspondances," "Bohemiens en voyage," "Obsession." [J60,l] 

The passage "where everything, even horror, turns to magic" 325 could hardly be 
better exemplified than by Poe's description of the crowd. [ J60,2] 

Concerning the opening line from "La Servante au grand coeur": on the words 
"of whom you were so jealous"™ falls an accent that one would not necessarily 
expect. The voice, as it were, draws back from "jealous." Therein lies the frailty 
of this already long-past situation. [ J60,3] 

On "Spleen I": through the word "mortality," the city with its offices and its 
statistical registers lies embedded in spleen, as in a picture puzzle <Vexierbild>. 

[J60.4] 

The whore is the most precious booty in the triumph of allegory — the life which 
signifies death. This quality is the only thing about her that cannot be bought, 
and for Baudelaire it is the only thing that matters. [ J60,5] 

Around the middle of the century, the conditions of artistic production under- 
went a change. This change consisted in the fact that for the first time the form of 
the commodity imposed itself decisively on the work of art, and the form of the 



masses on its public. Particularly vulnerable to these developments, as can be 
seen now unmistakably in our century, was the lyric. It is the unique distinction 
of Les Fleurs du mal that Baudelaire responded to precisely these altered condi- 
tions with a book of poems. It is the best example of heroic conduct to be found 
in his life. [J60.6] 

The heroic bearing of Baudelaire is akin to that of Nietzsche. Though Baudelaire 
likes to appeal to Catholicism, his historical experience is nonetheless that which 
Nietzsche fixed in the phrase "God is dead." hi Nietzsche's case, this experience 
is projected cosmologically in the thesis that nothing new occurs any more, hi 
Nietzsche, the accent lies on eternal recurrence, which the human being has to 
face with heroic composure. For Baudelaire, it is more a matter of "the new," 
which must be wrested heroically from what is always again the same. [J60.7] 

The historical experiences which Baudelaire was one of the first to undergo (it is 
no accident that he belongs to the generation of Marx, whose principal work 
appeared in the year of his death) have become, in our day, only more wide- 
spread and persistent. The traits displayed by capital in June 1848 have, since 
then, been engraved still more sharply in the ruling classes. And the particular 
difficulties involved in mastering the poetry of Baudelaire are the obverse of the 
ease with which one can give oneself up to it. In a word, there is nothing yet 
obsolete about this poetry. This fact has determined the character of most of the 
books concerned with Baudelaire: they are feuilletons on an expanded scale. 

[J60a,l] 

Particularly toward the end of his life, and in view of the limited success of his 
work, Baudelaire more and more threw himself into the bargain. He flung him- 
self after his work, and thus, to the end, confirmed in his own person what he had 
said about the unavoidable necessity of prostitution for the poet. [J60a,2] 

One encounters an abundance of stereotypes in Baudelaire, as in the Baroque 
poets. [J60a,3] 

For the decline of the aura, one thing within the realm of mass production is of 
overriding importance: the massive reproduction of the image. [J60a,4] 

Impotence is the key figure of Baudelaire's solitude. 327 An abyss divides him from 
his fellow men. It is this abyss of which his poetry speaks. [J60a,5] 

We may assume that the crowd as it appears in Poe, with its abrupt and intermit- 
tent movements, is described quite realistically, hi itself, the description has a 
higher truth. These are less the movements of people going about their business 
than the movements of the machines they operate. With uncanny foresight, Poe 
seems to have modeled the gestures and reactions of the crowd on the rhythm of 
these machines. The flaneur, at any rate, has no part in such behavior. Instead, he 



forms an obstacle in its path. His nonchalance would therefore be nothing other 
than an unconscious protest against the tempo of the production process. (Com- 
pare D2a,l.) [J60a,6] 



Fog appears as a consolation of the solitary man. It fills the abyss surrounding 
him. [J60a,7] 

Baudelaire's candidacy for the Academie was a sociological experiment. [ J 6 1,1] 

Series of types — from the national guardsman Mayeux, through Gavroche, to 
the ragpicker, to Vireloque, to Ratapoil. 32 " [ J 6 1,2] 

Baudelaire's allegorical mode of vision was not understood by any of his contem- 
poraries and was thus, in the end, completely overlooked. [ J61,3] 

Surprising proclamations and mysteiy-mongering, sudden attacks and impene- 
trable irony, belong to the raison d'etat of the Second Empire and were charac- 
teristic of Napoleon III. They are no less characteristic of the theoretical writings 
of Baudelaire. [J61.4] 

The cosmic shudder in Victor Hugo has little in common with the naked terror 
that seized Baudelaire in his spleen. Hugo felt perfectly at home in the world of 
the spirits. It is the complement of his domestic existence, which was itself not 
without horror. [ J61.5] 

The veiled import of the first section of "Chant d'automne": the season is named 
only in the tiny phrase "autumn is here!" 329 and the following line says that, for 
the poet, it has no other meaning than as a foreboding of death. To him, it has 
brought no harvest. [ J 6 1 , 6 ] 

In the guise of a beggar, Baudelaire continually put the model of bourgeois 
society to the test. His willfully induced, if not deliberately maintained, depend- 
ence on his mother not only has a psychoanalytically identifiable cause; it also 
has a social cause. [J61,7] 

The labyrinth is the right path for him who always arrives early enough at his 
destination. For the flaneur, this destination is the marketplace. [J 61, 8] 

The path of one who shrinks from arriving at his goal will easily take the form of 
a labyrinth. [For the flaneur, this goal is the marketplace.] The same holds for the 
social class that does not want to know where it is heading. Moreover, nothing 
prevents it from reveling in this roundahout way and hence substituting the 
shudder of pleasure for the shudder of death. This was the case for the society of 
the Second Empire. [ J 6 1 , 9 ] 



What concerned Baudelaire was not manifest and short-term demand, but latent 
and long-term demand. Les Flews du mal demonstrates not only that he correctly 
assessed such a demand but, in addition, that this sureness in evaluation is 
inseparable f rom his significance asapoet. [ J 6 1 , 1 0 ] 

One of the most powerful attractions of prostitution appears only with the rise of 
the metropolis — namely, its operation in the mass and through the masses. It was 
the existence of the masses that first enabled prostitution to overspread large 
areas of the city, whereas earlier it had been confined, if not to houses, at least to 
the streets. The masses first made it possible for the sexual object to be reflected 
simultaneously in a hundred different forms of allurement — forms which the 
object itself produced. Beyond this, salability itself can become a sexual stimulus; 
and this attraction increases wherever an abundant supply of women under- 
scores their character as commodity. With the exhibition of girls ;!:(0 in rigidly 
uniform dress at a later period, the music hall review explicitly introduced the 
mass-produced article into the libidinal life of the big-city dweller. [ J61a,l] 

As a matter of fact, if the rule of the bourgeoisie were one day to be stabilized 
(which never before has happened, and never can), then the vicissitudes of 
history would in actuality have no more claim on the attention of thinkers than a 
child's kaleidoscope, which with every turn of the hand dissolves the established 
order into a new array. As a matter of fact, the concepts of the ruling class have in 
every age been the mirrors that enabled an image of "order" to prevail. [ J61a,2] 

In L'Eternite par les astres, Blanqui displayed no antipathy to the belief in prog- 
ress; between the lines, however, he heaped scorn on the idea. One should not 
necessarily conclude from this that he was untrue to his political credo. The 
activity of a professional revolutionary such as Blanqui does not presuppose any 
faith in progress; it presupposes only the determination to do away with present 
injustice. The irreplaceable political value of class hatred consists precisely in its 
affording the revolutionary class a healthy indifference toward speculations con- 
cerning progress. Indeed, it is just as worthy of humane ends to rise up out of 
indignation at prevailing injustice as to seek through revolution to better the 
existence of future generations. It is just as worthy of the human being; it is also 
more like the human being. Hand in hand with such indignation goes the firm 
resolve to snatch humanity at the last moment from the catastrophe looming at 
every turn. That was the case with Blanqui. He always refused to develop plans 
for what comes "later." [J61a,3] 

Baudelaire was obliged to lay claim to the dignity of the poet in a society that had 
no more dignity of any kind to confer. Hence the bouffonnerie of his public 
appearances. [ J62,l] 

The figure of Baudelaire has passed into his fame. For the petty-bourgeois mass 
of readers, his story is an image d'Epinal, an illustrated "life history of a libertine." 



This image has contributed greatly to Baudelaire's reputation — little though its 
purveyors may have numbered among his friends. Over this image another 
imposes itself, one that has had a less widespread but more lasting effect: it shows 
Baudelaire as exemplar of an aesthetic Passion. [J62,2] 

The aesthete in Kierkegaard is predestined to the Passion. See "The Unhappiest 
Man" in Eilha/Q: [ J62.3] 

The grave as the secret chamber in which Eros and Sexus settle their ancient 
quarrel. [J62.4] 

The stars in Baudelaire represent a picture puzzle <\hderbiltb of the commodity. 
They are the eversame in great masses. [J62,5] 

Baudelaire did not have the humanitaiian idealism of a Victor Hugo or a La- 
martine. The emotional buoyancy of a Musset was not at his disposal. He did 
not, like Gautier, take pleasure in his times, nor could he deceive himself about 
them like Leconte de Lisle. It was not given him to find a ref uge in devotions, like 
Verlaine, nor to heighten the youthful vigor of his lyric elan through the betrayal 
of his adulthood, like Rimbaud. As rich as Baudelaire is in knowledge of his craft, 
he is relatively unprovided with stratagems to face the times. And even the grand 
tragic part he had composed for the arena of his day — the role of the "mod- 
ern" — could be filled in the end only by himself. All this Baudelaire no doubt 
recognized. The eccentricities in which he took such pleasure were those of the 
mime who has to perform before a public incapable of following the action on the 
stage — a mime, furthermore, who knows this about his audience and, in his 
performance, allows that knowledge its rightful due. [J62,6] 

In the psychic economy, the mass-produced article appears as obsessional idea. [It 
answers to no natural need.] The neurotic is compelled to channel it violently 
among the ideas within the natural circulation process. [J62a,l] 

The idea of eternal recurrence transforms the historical event itself into a mass- 
produced article. But this conception also displays, in another respect — on its 
obverse side, one could say — a trace of the economic circumstances to which it 
owes its sudden topicality. This was manifest at the moment the security of the 
conditions of life was considerably diminished through an accelerated succession 
of crises. The idea of eternal recurrence derived its luster from the fact that it was 
no longer possible, in all circumstances, to expect a recurrence of conditions 
across any interval of time shorter than that provided by eternity. The quotidian 
constellations very gradually began to be less quotidian. Very gradually their 
recurrence became a little less frequent, and there could arise, in consequence, 
the obscure presentiment that henceforth one must rest content with cosmic 
constellations. Habit, in short, made ready to surrender some of its prerogatives. 
Nietzsche says, "I love short-lived habits ," 331 and Baudelaire already, throughout 



his life, was incapable of developing regular habits. Habits are the armature of 
long experience iErfthrunp, whereas they are decomposed by individual experi- 
ences <Erlebnisse>. [J62a,2] 



A paragraph of the "Diapsalmata ad se ipsum" deals with boredom. It closes with 
the sentence: "My soul is like the Dead Sea, over which no bird can fly; when it has 
flown midway, then it sinks down to death and destruction." Soren Kierkegaard, 
Entiveder-Oder (Jena, 1911), vol. 1, p. 33. Compare "I am a graveyard that the 
moon abhors" ("Spleen II"). 332 [J62a,3] 

Melancholy, pride, and images. "Carking care is my feudal castle. It is built like an 
eagle's nest upon the peak of a mountain lost in the clouds. No one can take it by 
storm. From this abode I dart down into the world of reality to seize my prey; hut 
I do not remain down there, I bear my quarry aloft to my stronghold. What I 
capture are images." Soren Kierkegaard, Entiveder-Oder (Jena, 1911), vol. 1, 
p. 38 ("Diapsalmata ad se ipsum"). 333 [J62a,4] 

On the use of the term "aesthetic" in Kierkegaard. In choosing a governess, one 
takes into account "also her aesthetic qualifications for amusing the children." 
Soren Kierkegaard, Entiveder-Oder (Jena, 1911), vol. 1, p. 255 ("The Rotation 
Method"). 33 ' 1 [J63,l] 

Blanqui's journey: "One tires of living in the country, and moves to the city; one 
tires of one's native land, and travels abroad; one is europamiide <tired of 
Europe), and goes to America; and so on. Finally one indulges in a sentimental 
hope of endless journeyings from star to star." Soren Kierkegaard, Entiveder- 
Oder (Jena, 1911), vol. 1, p. 260 ("The Rotation Method"). 1135 [ J63.2] 

Boredom: "it causes a dizziness like that produced hy looking down into a yawning 
chasm, and this dizziness is infinite." Kierkegaard, Entiveder-Oder, vol. 1, p. 260 
("The Rotation Method"). 336 [J63,3] 

On the Passion of the aesthetic man in Kierkegaard and its foundation in memory: 
"Memory is emphatically the real element of the unhappy man. ... If I imagine a 
man who himself had had no childhood, . . . but who now . . . discovered all the 
beauty that there is in childhood, and who would now remember his own child- 
hood, constantly staring back into that emptiness of the past, then I would have an 
excellent illustration of the truly unhappy man. " Soren Kierkegaard, Entiveder- 
Oder (Jena, 1911), vol. 1 pp. 203-204 ("The Unhappiest Man").' 137 [J63.4] 

Baudelaire's desire to write a book in which he would spew his disgust with 
humanity into its face recalls the passage in which Kierkegaard confesses to using 
the either-or as "an interjection" which he would "shout at mankind, just as boys 
shout 'Yah! Yah!' after a Jew." Kierkegaard, Entweder-Oder (Jena, 1913), vol. 2, 



p. 133 ("Equilibrium between the Aesthetical and the Ethical in the Composition 
of Personality"). 338 [J63.5] 



On the "sectioning of time." "This ... is the most adequate expression for the 
aesthetic existence: it is in the moment. Hence the prodigious oscillations to which 
the man who lives aesthetically is exposed." Kierkegaard, Entiveder-Oder, vol. 2, 
p. 196 ("Equilibrium between the Aesthetical and the Ethical in the Composition 
of Personality"). 339 [J63.6] 

On impotence. Around the middle of the century, the bourgeois class ceases to 
be occupied with the future of the productive forces it has unleashed. (Now 
appear those counterparts to the great Utopias of a More or Campanella, who 
had welcomed the accession of this class and affirmed the identity of its interests 
with the demands of freedom and justice — now appear, that is to say, the Utopias 
of a Bellamy or a Moilin, which are mainly concerned with touching up the 
notion of economic consumption and its incentives.) In order to concern itself 
further with the future of the productive forces which it had set going, the 
bourgeoisie would first of all have had to renounce the idea of private income. 
That the habit of "coziness" so typical of bourgeois comfort around midcentury 
goes together with this lassitude of the bourgeois imagination, that it is one with 
the luxury of "never having to think about how the forces of production must 
develop in their hands" — these things admit of very little doubt. The dream of 
having children is merely a beggarly stimulus when it is not imbued with the 
dream of a new nature of things in which these children might one day live, or for 
which they can struggle. Even the dream of a "better humanity" in which our 
children would "have a better life" is only a sentimental fantasy reminiscent of 
Spitzweg when it is not, at bottom, the dream of a better nature in which they 
would live. (Herein lies the inextinguishable claim of the Fourierist Utopia, a 
claim which Marx had recognized [and which Russia had begun to act on].) The 
latter dream is the living source of the biological energy of humanity, whereas the 
former is only the muddy pond from which the stork draws children. Baude- 
laire's desperate thesis concerning children as the creatures closest to original sin 
is not a bad complement to this image. [ J63a,l] 

Re the dances of death: "Modern artists are far too neglectful of those magnificent 
allegories of the Middle Ages." Ch. B., Oeuvres, vol. 2, p. 257 ("Salon de 
1859"). 340 [J63a,2] 

It is impotence that makes for the bitter cup of male sexuality. From this impo- 
tence springs Baudelaire's attachment to the seraphic image of woman, as well as 
his fetishism. It follows that Keller's "sin of the poet" — namely, "to invent sweet 
images of women, / such as bitter earth never harbors" 3 " — is certainly not his. 
Keller's women have the sweetness of chimeras. Baudelaire, in his female figures, 
remains precise, and therefore French, because with him the fetishistic and the 
seraphic elements do not coincide, as they always do in Keller. [ J64,l] 



"Of course, Marx antl Engels ironizecl an absolute idealist faith in progress. 
(Engels commends Fourier for having introduced the future disappearance of 
humanity into his reflections on history, as Kant introduced the future disappear- 
ance of the solar system.) In this connection, Engels also makes fun of 'the talk 
about illimitable human perfectibility.'" 3 ' 12 Letter of (Hermann) Duncker to Grete 
Steffin, July 18, 1938. [J64,2] 

The mythic concept of the task of the poet ought to be defined through the 
profane concept of the instrument. — The great poet never confronts his work 
simply as the producer; he is also, at the same time, its consumer. Naturally, in 
contrast to the public, he consumes it not as entertainment but as tool. This 
instrumental character represents a use value that does not readily enter into the 
exchange value. [J64.3] 

On Baudelaire's "Crepuscule du soir": the big city knows no true evening twi- 
light. In any case, the artificial lighting does away with all transition to night. The 
same state of affairs is responsible for the fact that the stars disappear from the 
sky over the metropolis. Who ever notices when they come out? Kant's tran- 
scription of the sublime through "the starry heavens above me and the moral law 
within me" 3 * 3 could never have been conceived in these terms by an inhabitant of 
the big city. [J64.4] 

Baudelaire's spleen is the suffering entailed by the decline of the aura. "Adorable 
Spring has lost its perfume." 3 " [J64,5] 

Mass production is the principal economic cause — and class warfare the principal 
social cause — of the decline of the aura. [ J64a,l] 

De Maistre on the "savage" — a reflection directed against Rousseau: "One need 
only glance at the savage to see the curse written ... on the external form of his 
body. ... A formidable hand weighing on these doomed races wipes out in them 
the two distinctive characteristics of our grandeur: foresight and perfectibility. 
The savage cuts the tree down to gather the fruit; he unyokes the ox that the 
missionary has just entrusted to him, and cooks it with wood from the plow." 
Joseph de Maistre, Les Soirees de Saint-Peter sbour g, ed. Hattier (Paris <1922>), 
p. 23 (second dialogue). 34 "' [J64a,2] 

The Knight in the third dialogue: "I would very much like, though it cost me 
dearly, to discover a truth capable of shocking the whole human race. I would 
state it plainly to everyone's face." Joseph de Maistre, Les Soirees de Saint-Peter s- 
bourg, ed. Hattier, p. 29. [J64a,3] 



"Beware, ahove all, one very common prejudice . . . — namely, the belief that the 
great reputation of a book presupposes an extensive and reasoned knowledge of 
that hook. Such is not the case, I assure you. The great majority are capable of 



judging solely by the lights of a rather small number of men who first deliver an 
opinion. They pass on, and this opinion survives them. The new hooks arriving on 
the scene leave no time for reading any others; and soon these others are judged 
only according to a vague reputation." Joseph de Maistre, Les Soirees de Saint- 
Petersbourg, ed. Hattier (Paris), p. 44 (sixth dialogue). [J64a,4] 

"The whole earth, continually steeped in hlood, is nothing but an immense altar on 
which every living thing must be sacrificed without end, without restraint, without 
respite, until the consummation of the world, the extinction of evil, the death of 
death." De Maistre, Soirees, ed. Hattier, p. 61 (seventh dialogue: "La Guerre"). 346 

[J64a,5] 

The characters in Les Soirees de Saint-Petersbourg: the Knight has felt the influence 
of Voltaire, and the Senator is a mystic, while the Count expounds the doctrine of 
the author himself. [ J64a,6] 

"But do you realize, gentlemen, the source of this fl ood of insolent doctrines which 
unceremoniously judge God and call him to account for his orders? They come to 
us from that great phalanx we call savants dntellectuals> and whom we have not 
been ahle in this age to keep in their place, which is a secondary one. At other 
times, there were very few savants, and a very small minority of this very small 
minority were ungodly; today one sees nothing but savants. It is a profession, a 
crowd, a nation, and among them the already unfortunate exception has become 
the rule. On every side they have usurped a limitless influence; yet if there is one 
thing certain in this world, it is, to my mind, that it is not for science to guide men. 
Nothing necessary for this is entrusted to science. One would have to he out of 
one's mind to believe that God has charged the academies with teaching us what he 
is and what we owe to him. It rests with the prelates, the nobles, the great officers 
of state to be the repositories and guardians of the saving truths, to teach nations 
what is had and what good, what true and what false, in the moral and spiritual 
order. Others have no right to reason on this kind of matter. They have the natural 
sciences to amuse them. What are they complaining ahout?" De Maistre, Les 
Soirees de Saint-Petersbourg, ed. Hattier (Paris), p. 72 (eighth dialogue).''' 7 

[165,1] 

On judicial procedures: "Under the rule of Muslim law, authority punishes, even 
with death, the man it thinks deserves it, at the very moment and place it seizes 
him; this brusque enforcement of the law, which has not lacked blind admirers, is 
nevertheless one of the many proofs of the brutalization and divine censure of 
these peoples. Among us, things are quite different. The culprit must be arrested; 
he must be charged; he must defend himself; he must above all settle his conscience 
and his worldly affairs; practical arrangements for his punishment must be made. 
Finally, to take everything into account, a certain time must he left to take him to 
the appointed place of punishment. The scaffold is an altar; it cannot therefore he 
either set up in a certain place or moved, except by authority. These delays, 



praiseworthy in their very excessiveness, yet still not lacking their hlincl detrac- 
tors, are no less a proof of our superiority." De Maistre, Les Soirees de Saint- 
Petersbourg, ed. Hattier (Paris), p. 78 (tenth dialogue). 3 " 1 [J65,2] 

God appears in de Maistre as mysterium tremendum. 3 ' 15 [ J65,3] 

In the seventh dialogue ("La Guerre"), a series of sentences beginning with the 
formula "War is divine." Among these, one of the most extravagant: "War is 
divine in the protection granted to the great leaders, even the most daring, who 
are rarely struck down in battle." Soirees de Saint-Petersbourg, pp. 61-62, 35 * 

[J65a,l] 

There is, in Baudelaire a latent tension between the destructive and the idyllic 
aspects of death — between its bloody and its palliative nature. [J65a,2] 

Jugendsal phraseology should still be considered progressive in Baudelaire. 

[J65a,3] 

"Destruction's bloody retinue" 351 is the court of allegory. [ J65a,4] 

The historicism of the nineteenth century is the background against which 
Baudelaire's "pursuit of modernity" stands out. (Villemain, Cousin.) [J65a,5] 

So long as there is semblance in history, it will find in nature its ultimate refuge. 
The commodity, which is the last burning-glass of historical semblance <Schein\ 
celebrates its triumph in the fact that nature itself takes on a commodity charac- 
ter. It is this commodity appearance < Warenscheim of nature that is embodied in 
the whore. "Money feeds sensuality," it is said, and this formula in itself affords 
only the barest outline of a state of affairs that reaches well beyond prostitution. 
Under the dominion of the commodity fetish, the sex appeal of the woman is 
more or less tinged with the appeal of the connnodity. It is no accident that the 
relations of the pimp to his girlfriend, whom he sells as an "article" on the 
market, have so inflamed the sexual fantasies of the bourgeoisie. The modem 
advertisement shows, from another angle, to what extent the attractions of the 
woman and those of the commodity can be merged. The sexuality that in former 
times — on a social level — was stimulated through imagining the future of the 
productive forces is mobilized now through imagining the power of capital. 

[J65a,6] 

The circumstance of the new is perhaps nowhere better illuminated than in the 
figure of the flaneur. His thirst for the new is quenched by the crowd, which 
appears self -impelled and endowed with a soul of its own. In fact, this collective is 
nothing but appearance. This "crowd," in which the flaneur takes delight, is just 
the empty mold with which, seventy years later, the Volksgemeinschmft <People's 
Community^ 52 was cast. The flaneur who so prides himself on his alertness, on 



his nonconformity, was in this respect also ahead of his contemporaries', he was 
the first to fall victim to an ignis f atuus which since that time has blinded many 
millions. [ J66,l] 



Baudelaire idealizes the experience of the commodity, in that he ascribes to it, as 
canon, the experience of allegory. [J66,2] 

If it is imagination that presents correspondences to the memory, it is thinking 
that consecrates allegory to it. Memory brings about the convergence of imagina- 
tion and thinking. [J66.3] 

With the new manufacturing processes that lead to imitations, semblance is 
consolidated in the commodity. [J66,4] 

Between the theory of natural correspondences and the repudiation of nature 
exists a contradiction. It is resolved insofar as within the memory impressions 
become detached from individual experiences, so that the long experience stored 
up in those impressions is released and can be fed into the allegorical fundus. <See 
J62a,2.> [J66.5] 

<Stefan> George translated "Spleen et Ideal" by "Triibsinn und Vergeistigung" 
<Melancholy and Spiritualizatiom, thus hitting upon the essential meaning of the 
ideal in Baudelaire. [J66,6] 

With Meryon, die majesty and decrepitude of Paris come into their own. 

[J66.7] 

In the form taken by prostitution in the big cities, the woman appears not only as 
commodity but, in a precise sense, as mass-produced article. This is indicated by 
the masking of individual expression in favor of a professional appearance, such 
as makeup provides. The point is made still more emphatically, later on, by the 
uniformed girls of the music-hall review. [ J66,8] 

Baudelaire's opposition to progress was the indispensable condition for his suc- 
cess at capturing Paris in his poetry. Compared with this poetry, all later big-city 
lyric must be accounted feeble. What it lacks is precisely that reserve toward its 
subject matter which Baudelaire owed to his frenetic hatred of progress. 

[J66a,l] 

In Baudelaire, Paris as an emblem of antiquity contrasts with its masses as an 
emblem of modernity. [ J66a,2] 

On Le Spleen de Paris: news items are the leaven that allows the urban masses to 
rise in Baudelaire's imagination. [ J66a,3] 

Spleen is the feeling that corresponds to catastrophe in permanence. [ J66a,4] 



Itis a very specific experience that the proletariat has in the big city — one in many 
respects similar to that which the immigrant has there. [ J66a,5] 



To the flaneur, his city is — even if, like Baudelaire, he happened to be bom 
there — no longer native ground. It represents for him a theatrical display, an 



arena. [J66a,6] 

Baudelaire never wrote a whore-poem from the point of view of the whore. (But 
compare Brecht, Lesebuch Jur Stadtebewohner, no. 5.) 353 [ J66a,7] 

Preface to Dupont's poems in 1851; essay on Dupont in 1861. [ J66a,8] 



In the erotology of the damned — as that of Baudelaire might be called — infertility 
and impotence are the decisive factors. They alone are what give to the ciuel and 
ill-famed moments of desire in sexual life a purely negative character — something 
that is lost, it goes without saying, in the act of procreation, as in relations de- 
signed to last an entire lifetime (that is, in marriage) . These realities instituted for 
the long term — children, marriage — would lack all assurance of longevity, had 
not the most destructive energies of the human being entered into their creation, 
contributing to their stability not less but more than many another energy. But 
these relations are legitimated, through this contribution, only to the extent that 
this is really possible for decisive libidinal movements in present-day society. 

[J66a,9] 

The social value of marriage rests decidedly on its longevity, insofar as this latter 
holds within it the idea of an ultimate and definitive — if continually deferred — 
"confrontation" of the spouses. From this confrontation the couple are preserved 
so long as the marriage itself lasts — which is to say, in principle, for the rest of 
their lives. [J67,l] 

Relation between commodity and allegory: "value," as the natural burning-glass 
of semblance in history, outshines "meaning." Its luster <Schein> is more difficult 
to dispel. It is, moreover, the very newest. In the Baroque age, the fetish character 
of the commodity was still relatively undeveloped. And the commodity had not 
yet so deeply engraved its stigma — the proletarianization of the producers — on the 
process of production. Allegorical perception could thus constitute a style in the 
seventeenth century, in a way that it no longer could in the nineteenth. Baude- 
laire as allegorist was entirely isolated. He sought to recall the experience of the 
commodity to an allegorical experience. In this, he was doomed to founder, and 
it became clear that the relentlessness of his initiative was exceeded by the relent- 
lessness of reality. Hence a strain in his work that feels pathological or sadistic 
only because it missed out on reality — though just by a hair. [J67,2] 

It is one and the same historical night at the onset of which the owl of Minerva 
(with Hegel) begins its flight and Eros (with Baudelaire) lingers before the empty 
pallet, torch extinguished, dreaming of bygone embraces. [J67,3] 



The experience of allegory, which holds fast to ruins, is properly the experience 
of eternal transience. [ J67,4] 



Prostitution can lay claim to being considered "work" the moment work be- 
comes prostitution. In fact, the lorette 35 ' 1 was the first to carry out a radical renun- 
ciation of the costume of lover. She already arranges to be paid for her time; from 
there, it is only a short distance to those who demand "wages." [ J67,5] 



Already at work in Jugendstil is the bourgeois tendency to set nature and technol- 
ogy in mutual opposition, as absolute antitheses. Thus, Futurism will later give 
to technology a destructive antinatural accent; in Jugendstil, the energies des- 
tined to operate in this direction are beginning to unfold. The idea of a world 
bewitched and, as it were, denatured by technological development informs a 
good many of its creations. [ J67,6] 

The prostitute does not sell her labor power; her job, however, entails the fiction 
that she sells her powers of pleasure. Insofar as this represents the utmost exten- 
sion attainable by the sphere of the commodity, the prostitute may be considered, 
from early on, a precursor of commodity capitalism. But precisely because the 
commodity character was in other respects undeveloped, this aspect did not need 
to stand out so glaringly as would subsequently be the case. As a matter of fact, 
prostitution in the Middle Ages does not, for example, display the crudeness that 
in the nineteenth century would become the rule. [J67a,l] 

The tension between emblem and commercial logo makes it possible to measure 
the changes that have taken place in the world of things since the seventeenth 
century. [J67a,2] 

Strong fixations of die sense of smell, such as Baudelaire seems to have known, 
could make fetishism likely. [J67a,3] 

The new ferment that enters into the taedium vitae and turns it to spleen is 
self -estrangement. [J67a,4] 

Hollowing out of the inner life. Of the infinite regress of reflection that, in Ro- 
manticism, in a spirit of play, both expanded the space of life in ever-widening 
circles and reduced it within ever narrower frames, there remained to Baudelaire 
only the "somber and lucid exchange" with himself, as he represents it in the 
image of a conversation between the jack of hearts and the queen of spades in an 
old pack of cards. Later, Jules Renard will say: "His heart . . . more alone than 
an ace of hearts in the middle of a deck of cards ." 3r ' r> [J67a,5] 



There may well be die closest connection between the allegorical imagination 
and the imagination put in thrall to thinking during hashish intoxication. At 



work in the latter are different sorts of powers: a genius of melancholy gravity, 
another of Ariel-like spirituality. [J67a,6] 



In view of its position immediately after "La Destruction," <in Les Flews du mal,> 
"Une Martyre" is rich in associations. The allegorical intention has done its work 
on this martyr: she is in pieces. [J67a,7] 

In "La Mort des amants," correspondences weave away without any hint of al- 
legorical intention. Sob and smile — as cloud formations of the human face — min- 
gle in the tercets. Villiers de l'lsle-Adam saw in this poem, according to a letter he 
wrote to Baudelaire, the application of the latter's "musical theories." [ J67a,8] 

"La Destruction" on the demon: "he fills my burning lungs / with sinful cravings 
never satisfied." 356 The lung as the seat of desire is the boldest intimation of 
desire's unrealizability that can be imagined. Compare the invisible stream in 
"Benediction." [J68.1] 

Of all the Baudelairean poems, "La Destruction" comprises the most relentless 
elaboration of the allegorical intention. The "bloody retinue," which the poet is 
forced by the demon to contemplate, is the court of allegory — the scattered 
apparatus by dint of which allegory has so disfigured and so unsettled the world 
of things that only the fragments of that world are left to it now, as object of its 
brooding. The poem breaks off abruptly; it itself gives the impression — doubly 
surprising in a sonnet — of something fragmentary. [ J68,2] 

Compare "Le Vin des chiffonniers" with "Dans ce Cabriolet," by Sainte-Beuve 
(<Les Consolations,) vol. 2 [Paris, 1863], p. 193): 

Seated in this cabriolet, I examine the man 

Who drives me, the man who's little more than machine, 

Hideous with his thick beard, his long matted hair: 

Vice and wine and sleep weigh down his sottish eyes. 

How far then, I thought, can humanity sink? 

And I draw hack to the other corner of the seat. 

The poet goes on to ask himself whether his own soul is not just as unkempt as the 
soul of the coachman. Baudelaire mentions this poem in his letter of January 15, 
1866, to Sainte-Beuve. 3 " [J68.3] 

The ragpicker is the most provocative figure of human misery. "Ragtag" <Lump- 
enproletarien in a double sense: clothed in rags and occupied with rags. "Here 
we have a man whose job it is to pick up the day's rubbish in the capital. He 
collects and catalogues everything that the great city has cast off, everything it 
has lost, and discarded, and broken. He goes through the archives of debauchery, 
and the jumbled array of refuse. He makes a selection, an intelligent choice; like 
a miser hoarding treasure, he collects the garbage that will become objects of 
utility or pleasure when refurbished by Industrial magic" ("Du Vin et du 



haschisch," Oeuvres, vol. 1, pp. 249-250). As may be gathered from this prose 
description of 1851, Baudelaire recognizes himself in the figure of the ragman. 
The poem presents a further affinity with the poet, immediately noted as such: "a 
ragpicker stumbles past, wagging his head / and bumping into walls with a poet's 
grace, / pouring out his heartfelt schemes to one / and all, including spies of the 
police." 358 [J68.4] 

Much can be said on behalf of the supposition that "Le Vin des chiffonniers" was 
written around the time of Baudelaire's espousal of "beautiful utility." (The 
question cannot be settled with any certainty, because the poem first appeared in 
the book edition of Le s Fleurs du mal. — "Le Vin de l'assassin" was published for 
the first time in 1848 — in L'Echo des marchands de vins!) The ragpicker poem 
strenuously disavows the reactionary pronouncements of its author. The criti- 
cism on Baudelaire has overlooked this poem. [J68a,l] 

"Believe me, the wine of the barrieres has effectively preserved the shocks to 
which governmental structures have been subject." Edouard Foucaud, Paris in- 
venteur: Physiologie del'industrief ranqaise (Paris, 1844), p. 10. [J68a,2] 

Apropos of "Le Vin des chiffonniers": "There's brass in our pockets, / Pierre, 
let's go on a hinge; / On Mondays, you know, / I love to knock ahout. / I know of a 
wine for two sous / That's not half bad, / And so, let's go have some fun, / Let's 
walk up to the barriered H. Gourdon de Genouillac, Les Refrains de la rue, de 
1830 a 1870 (Paris, 1879), p. 56. [J68a,3] 

Travies often drew the type of the ragpicker. [ J68a,4] 

The son of the proletarian figures in "L'Ame du vin" with the words, "this frail 
athlete of life"' 59 — an infinitely sad correspondence of modernity and antiquity. 

[J68a,5] 

With regard to the "sectioning of time": the hidden construction of "Le Vin des 
amants" is grounded in the fact that only rather far along does the now surpris- 
ing light fall on the situation at hand: the ecstatic drunkenness which the lovers 
owe to the wine is a morning drunkenness. "Into the blue crystal of the morn- 
ing" 360 — this is the seventh line of this f ourteen-line poem. [ J68a,6] 

In the situation of the lovers "cradled gently on the wing / of the conniving 
whirlwind," 361 it is not far-fetched to hear a reminiscence of Fourier. "The whirl- 
winds of planetary spheres," we read in Silberling's Dictionnaire de sociologie pha- 
lansterienne (Paris, 1911), p. 433, "so measured in their motion that at any one 
moment they pass over billions of places — are, in our eyes, the seal of divine 
justice on the fluctuations of matter" (Fourier, Themie en concret ou positive, 
p. 320). [J68a,7] 



Baudelaire builds stanzas where it would seem almost impossible to construct 
them. Thus, in the sixth stanza of "Lesbos:" "ambitious hearts / that yearn, far 
from us, for a radiant smile / they dimly glimpse on the rim of other skies!" 362 

[J68a,8] 

On the desecration of the clouds : "Wandering a wasteland at high noon / . . . I 
saw a dismal stormcloud bearing down / upon my head, bristling with vicious 
imps" 363 — this is a conception that could stem directly from a print by Meryon. 

[J69.1] 

It is rare in French poetry that the big city is evoked through nothing but the 
immediate presentation of its inhabitants. This occurs with unsurpassable power 
in Shelley's poem on London <cited in M18>. (Wasn't Shelley's London more 
populous than the Paris of Baudelaire?) In Baudelaire, one encounters merely 
traces of a similar perception — though a good many traces. In few of his poems, 
however, is the metropolis portrayed so exclusively in terms of what it makes of 
its inhabitants as in "Spleen I." This poem shows in a veiled way how the soulless 
masses of the big city and the hopelessly depleted existence of individuals come 
to complement one another. The first is represented by the cemetery and the 
suburbs — mass assemblages of citizens ; the second, by the jack of hearts and the 
queen of spades. [J69.2] 

The hopeless decrepitude of the big city is felt particularly keenly in the first 
stanza of "Spleen I." [ J69.3] 

In the opening poem of Les Flews du mat, Baudelaire accosts the public in a most 
unusual fashion. He cozies up to them, if not exactly in a cozy vein. You could say 
he gathers his readers about him like a camarilla. [J69,4] 

The awareness of time's empty passage and the taedium vitae are the two weights 
that keep the wheels of melancholy going. In this regard, the last poem of the 
"Spleen et ideal" sequence corresponds exactly to the sequence "La Mort." 

[J69.5] 

The poem "L'Horloge" <The Clock> takes the allegorical treatment quite far. 
Grouped about the clock, which occupies a special position in the hierarchy of 
emblems, are Pleasure, the Now, Time, Chance, Virtue, and Repentance. (On 
the sylphid, compare the "wretched theater" in "L'Irreparable," 301 and on the inn, 
the auberge in the same poem.) [J69,6] 

Tiie "grotesque and livid sky" of "Horreur sympathique" 365 is the sky of Meryon. 

[J69,7] 



On the "sectioning of time," and on "L'Horloge" in particular, Poe's "Colloquy of 
Monos and Una": "There seemed to have sprung up in the brain that of which 



no words could convey to the merely human intelligence even an indistinct 
conception. Let me term it a mental pendulous pulsation. It was the moral 
embodiment of man's abstract idea of Time. ... By its aid I measured the irregu- 
larities of the clock upon the mantel, and of the watches of the attendants. Their 
tickings came sonorously to my ears. The slightest deviation from the true pro- 
portion . . . affected me just as violations of abstract truth are wont, on earth, to 
affect the moral sense" (Edgar Allan Poe, Nouvett.es Histoires extraordinaires <Paris, 
1886>, pp. 336-337). 366 This description is nothing but one great euphemism for 
the utter void of time to which man is surrendered in spleen. [J69a,l] 

". . . until night / voluptuously reaches for / the horizon, consoling all — / even 
hunger, concealing all — / even shame" ("La Fin de la journee") 367 — this is the 
summer lightning of social conflicts in the night sky of the metropolis. [ J69a,2] 

"You seem, for setting off my darkness, more / mockingly to magnify the space / 
which bars me from those blue immensities" (" l Je t'adore a l'egal . . ."). Juxta- 
pose: "And the human face — which Ovid thought was made to mirror the stars — 
see it now, no longer expressing anything but a crazy ferocity, or rigid in a kind of 
death!" {Oeu.vres, vol. 2, p. 628 ["Fusees," no. 3]). 3 «" [J69a,3] 

In studying the allegorical in the work of Baudelaire, it would be a mistake to 
undervalue the medieval element in relation to the Baroque. It is something 
difficult to describe, but may be grasped most readily if we recall how very much 
certain passages, certain poems ("Vers pour le portrait de M. Honore Daumier," 
"LAvertisseur," "Le Squelette Laboureur"), in their pregnant simplicity, contrast 
with others that are overburdened with meanings. This bareness gives them the 
sort of expression one finds in portraits by Fouquet. [J69a,4] 

A Blanquist look at the terrestrial globe: "I contemplate from on high the globe in 
its rondure, / and I no longer seek there the shelter of a hut" ("Le G«ut du 
neant"). WJ The poet has made his dwelling in space itself, one could say — or in the 
abyss. [J69a,5] 

Representations pass before the melancholic slowly, as in a procession. This 
image, typical in this complex of symptoms, is rare in Baudelaire. It occurs in 
"Horreur sympathique": "your vast mourning clouds / are the hearses of my 
dreams." 37 ' [J70,l] 

"Then all at once the raging bells break loose, / hurling to heaven their awful 
caterwaul" ("Spleen IV"). 371 The sky that is assailed by the bells is the same in 
which Blanqui's speculations move. [J70,2] 



"Behind the scenes, the frivolous decors / of all existence, deep in the abyss, / 
I see distinctly other, brighter worlds" ("La Voix"). Tbese are the worlds of 



L'Eternite par les astres. Compare "Le Gouffre" <The Abyss>: "my windows open 
on Infinity." 372 [J70.3] 



If we bring together "L'Irremediable" with the poem Mouquet attributed to 
Baudelaire, "Un Jour de pluie" <A Rainy Day>, then it becomes quite clear that 
what inspires Baudelaire is the state of surrender to the abyss, and we see also just 
where this abyss actually opens. The Seine localizes "Un Jour de pluie" in Paris. 
Of this locale we read: "In a fog heavy with poisonous vapors, / men are buried 
like sneaking reptiles; / though proud of their strength, they stumble blindly 
along /more painfully with each step" (vol. 1, p. 212). In "L'Irremediable," this 
image of the Parisian streets has become one of the allegorical visions of the abyss 
which the conclusion of the poem describes as "apt emblems": "A soul in torment 
descending / . . . into an echoing cavern / ... of vigilant slimy monsters / whose 
luminous eyes enforce / the gloom" (vol. 1, pp. 92-93). 373 [J70.4] 

Apropos of the catalogue of emblems presented by the poem "L'Irremediable," 
Crepet cites a passage fromcle Maistre's Soirees de Saint-Peter sbour g: "That river 
which one crosses hut once; that pitcher of the Danaid es, ahvays full and always 
empty; that liver of Tityus, ahvays regenerated under the beak of the vulture that 
ahvays devours it anew, . . . — these are so many speaking hieroglyphs, about 
which it is impossible to he mistaken." 374 [J70,5] 

The gesture of benediction, with outstretched arms, in Fidus (also in J?arat/ius- 
&*.*) — the gesture of someone carrying something. [J70,6] 

From the draft of an epilogue to the second edition of Les Fleurs du mal: "your 
magic cobbles piled for harricadcs, / your cheap orators' baroque rhetoric, / 
ranting of love while your sewers run with blood, / swirling to hell like mighty 
rivers" (vol. 1, p. 229). 3 " [J70a,l] 

"Benediction" presents the poet's path in life as Passion: "he sings the very 
stations of his cross." In places, the poem distantly recalls the fantasy in which 
Apollinaire, in Le Poete assassine (ch. 16), has imagined the extermination of poets 
by unbridled philistines: "and blinding flashes of his intellect / keep him from 
noticing the angry mob." 370 [J70a,2] 

A Blanquist look at humanity (and, at the same time, one of the few verses by 
Baudelaire that unveils a cosmic aspect) : "the Sky! black lid of that enormous pot 
/ in which innumerable generations boil" ("Le Couvercle"). 3 " [J70a,3] 

It is, above all, the "recollections" to which the "familiar eye" 37 " appertains. (This 
gaze, which is none other than the gaze of certain portraits, brings Poe to mind.) 

[J70a,4] 



"On solemn eves of Heavenly harvesting" ("L'lmprevu") 379 — an autumnal Ascen- 
sion. [J70a,5] 



"Cybele, qui les aime, augmente ses verdures" 380 — in Brecht's beautiful transla- 
tion: "Cybele, die sie liebt, legt mehr Grim vor" ("Cybele, who loves them, 
shows more green"). A mutation of the organic is implicit here. [J70a,6] 

"Le Gouffre" is the Baudelairean equivalent of Blanqui's "vision." [J70a,7] 

"O worms, black cronies without eyes or ears" 381 — here is something like sympa- 
thy for parasites. [J70a,8] 



Comparison of eyes to illuminated shopwindows: "Your eyes, lit up like shops to 
lure their trade / or fireworks in the park on holidays, / insolently make use of 
borrowed power" ("Tu mettrais l'univers"). 382 [J70a,9] 



Concerning "La Servante au grand coeur": the words, "of whom you were so 
jealous,™' 1 in the first line, do not bear precisely the accent one would expect. The 
voice, as it were, draws back from jalouse. Tliis ebbing of the voice is something 
extremely characteristic. (Remark of Pierre Leyris.) [ J70a,10] 

The sadistic imagination tends toward mechanical constructions. It may be that, 
when he speaks of the "nameless elegance of the human armature ," Baudelaire 
sees in the skeleton a kind of machinery. The point is made more clearly in "Le 
Vin de F assassin": "That bunch! They feel about as much / as plowshares break- 
ing ground — / plow or harrow! Which of them / has ever known True Love." 
And, unequivocally: "Blind and deaf machine, fertile in cruelties" ("Tu mettrais 
l'univers"). 31 " [J71.1] 



"Old-fashioned" and "immemorial" are still united in Baudelaire. The <things> 
that have gone out of fashion have become inexhaustible containers of memo- 
ries. It is thus the old women appear in Baudelaire's poetry ("Les Petites 
Vieilles"); thus the departed years ("Recueillement") ; it is thus the poet compares 
himself to a "stale boudoir where old-fashioned clothes / lie scattered among 
wilted fern and rose" ("Spleen II"). 385 [J71.2] 



Sadism and fetishism intertwine in those imaginations that seek to annex all 
organic life to the sphere of the inorganic. "O living matter, henceforth you're no 
more / Than a cold stone encompassed by vague fear / And by the desert, and 
the mist and sun" ("Spleen II"). 386 The assimilation of the living to dead matter 
was likewise a preoccupation of Flaubert's. The visions of his Saint Anthony are 
a triumph of fetishism, and worthy of those celebrated by Bosch on the Lisbon 
altar. [J71.3] 



If "Le Crepuscule du matin" opens with the sound of reveille in the barrack 
squares, one must remember that under Napoleon III, for reasons easy to under- 
stand, the interior of the city was filled with barracks. [ J71,4] 



Smile and sob, as cloud formation of the human face, are an unsuipassable 
manifestation of its spirituality. [ J71,5] 

In "Reve parisien," the forces of production are seemingly brought to a standstill, 
put out of commission. The landscape of this dream is the dazzling mirage of the 
leaden and desolate terrain that in "De Profundis clamavi" becomes the universe. 
"A frozen sun hangs overhead six months; / the other six, the earth is in its 
shroud — / no trees, no water, not one creature here, / a wasteland naked as the 
polar north!" 387 [J71,6] 

The phantasmagoria of "Reve parisien" recalls that of the world exhibitions, 
where the bourgeoisie cried out to the order of property and production their 
"Abide, you are so fair!" 3 * 8 [J71.7] 

Proust on "granting a kind of glory to the crowd": "It would seem impossible to 
better that." 389 [J71a,l] 

"And which, on those golden evenings when you feel yourself revive" 3 ™ — the second 
half of the line collapses on itself. Prosodically, it works to contradict what it 
affirms. This is, for Baudelaire, a characteristic procedure. [J71a,2] 

"Whose name is known only to the buried prompter" 391 — this comes from the 
world of Poe (compare "Remords posthume," "Le Mort joyeux"). [J71a,3] 

The only place in Le Flews du mal where the Baudelairean view of children is 
contravened is the fifth stanza of the first section of "Les Petites Vieilles": "the 
eyes of a child, a little girl who laughs / in sacred wonder at whatever shines!" 395 
To arrive at this outlook on childhood, the poet takes the longest way — the way 
leading through old age. [J71a,4] 

In Baudelaire's work, poems 99 and 100 of Les Fleurs du mal stand apart — as 
strange and solitary as the great stone gods of Easter Island. We know that they 
belong to the oldest parts of the text; Baudelaire himself pointed them out to his 
mother as poems referring to her, poems to which he had given no title because 
any advertisement of this secret connection was odious to him. What these 
poems mark out is a death-tranced idyll. Both, but especially the first, breathe an 
air of peace such as rarely obtains in Baudelaire. Both present the image of the 
fatherless family; the son, however, far from occupying the place of the father, 
leaves it empty. The distant sun that is setting in the first poem is the symbol of 
the father, of him whose gaze — "huge open eye in the curious sky" :i ' ):i — lingers 



without jealousy, sympathetic and remote, on the meal shared by mother and 
son. The second poem evokes the image of the fatherless family situated not 
around a table but around a grave. The sultriness of life pregnant with possibili- 
ties has entirely yielded to the cool night air of death. [J71a,5] 

The 'Tableaux parisiens" begin with a transfiguration of the city. The first, 
second, and, if you like, third poem of the cycle work together in this. "Paysage" 
is the city 5 s tete-a-tete with the sky. The only elements of the city to appear on the 
poet's horizon are the "workshop full of singing and gossip, and the chinmey- 
pots and steeples." 39 ' 1 Then "Le Soleil" adds the suburbs; nothing of the urban 
masses enters into the first three poems of "Tableaux parisiens." The fourth 
begins with an evocation of the Louvre, but it passes immediately, in the middle 
of the second stanza, into lamentation over the perishability of the great city. 

[J72,l] 

"Drawings to which the gravity/ and learning of some forgotten artist/. . . / 
have communicated beauty" 395 — la Beaute appears here, thanks to the definite 
article, as sober and "impassive." It has become the allegory of itself. [J72,2] 

On "Brumes et pluies" <Mists and Rains>: the city has become strange to the 
flaneur, and every bed "hazardous." 3 ™ (Multitude of night lodgings for Baude- 
laire.) [J72,3] 

We may be surprised to find the poem "Brumes et pluies" among "Tableaux 
parisiens." It verges on imagery of the country. But already Sainte-Beuve had 
written: "Oh, how sad the plain around the boulevard!" ("La Plaine, octobre," 
mentioned by Baudelaire centre Sainte-Beuve on January 15, 1866}. 397 The land- 
scape of Baudelaire's poem is, in fact, that of the city plunged in fog. It is the 
preferred canvas for the embroideries of boredom. [ J72,4] 

"Le Cygne" <The Swam has the movement of a cradle rocking back and forth 
between modernity and antiquity. In his notes, Baudelaire writes: "Conceive a 
sketch for a lyrical or fairy boitffbnnerie, a pantomime. . . . Steep the whole in an 
abnormal, dreamy atmosphere — the atmosphere of great days. Let there be some- 
thing lulling about it" ("Fusees," no. 22). 398 These great days are the days of 
recurrence. [J72,5] 

On the "foul demons in the atmosphere" : 389 they return as the "demons of the 
cities" in Georg Heym. They are grown more violent but, because they disclaim 
their resemblance to the "businessmen," they mean less. [ J72,6] 

Closing stanza of "Die Diimonen der Stiidte" <Demons of the Cities), hy Heym: 



But the demons are growing colossal. 

The horns on their heads draw hlood from the sky. 



Earthquakes ruinhle in the belly of the cities 
Beneath their hooves, lire in their wake. 



GeorgHeym, Dichtungen (Munich, 1922), p. 19. [J72a,l] 

"Je t'adore a l'egal de la voute nocturne" <I adore you no less than the vault of 
Nighty 100 — nowhere more clearly than in this poem is Sexus played off against 
Eros. One must turn from this poem to Goethe's "Selige Sehnsucht" <Blessed 
Longingy 101 to see, by comparison, what powers are conferred on the imagination 
when the sexual is joined with the erotic. [J72a,2] 

"Sonnet d'automne" describes, in a reserved but scrupulous way, the state of 
being that conditions Baudelaire's erode experiences: "My heart, on which 
everything jars, / . . . /is unwilling to disclose its hellish secret, / . . . /I hate all 
passion . . . / Let us love each other gently." This is like a distant reprise of the 
stanza in the West-Ostlicher Divan where Goethe conjures out of the houris and 
their poet an image of the erotic as a sort of paradisal variant of sexuality: "Their 
friendship reward his endeavor, / Compliant with sweet devotions, / Let him live 
with them forever: / All the good have modest notions." 402 [J72a,3] 

Marx on the Second Repuhlic: "Passions without truth, truths without passion; 
heroes without heroic deeds, history without events; development, whose sole 
driving force seems to he the calendar, wearying with constant repetition of the 
same tensions and relaxations. ... If any section of history has been painted gray 
on gray, it is this." Karl Marx, Der achtzehnte Brumaire des Louis Bonaparte, ed. 
Rjazanov (Vienna and Berlin <1927>), pp. 45-46. 403 [J72a,4] 

The opposite poles of the Baudelairean sensibility find their symbols equally in 
the skies. The leaden, cloudless sky symbolizes sensuality in thrall to the fetish; 
cloud formations are the symbol of sensuality spiritualized. [ J72a,5] 

Engels to Marx on Decemher 3, 1851: "For today, at any rate, the ass is as free . . . 
as the old man on the evening of the Eighteenth Brumaire, so completely unre- 
strained that he can't help exposing his asinine self in all directions. Appalling 
perspective of no resistance!" 101 (Karl Marx, Der achtzehnte Brumaire des Louis 
Bonaparte, ed. Rjazanov [Vienna and Berlin], p. 9). [ J73,l] 

Engels to Marx on December 1 1, 1851: "If, this time, the proletariat failed to fight 
en masse, it was because it was fully aware of its own . . . impotence and was 
prepared to suhmit with fatalistic resignation to a renewed cycle of Republic, 
Empire, restoration, and fresh revolution, until ... it regained fresh strength"' 105 
(Marx, Der achtzehnte Brumaire, p. 10). [J73,2] 

"As is known, May 15 [1848] had no other result save that of removing Blanqui 
and his comrades — that is, the real leaders of the proletarian party, the revolu- 



tionary communists — from the public stage for the entire duration of the cycle." 
Marx, Der achtzehnte Brumaire, ed. Rjazanov, p. 28.' lur, [ J73,3] 



America's spirit world enters into the description of the crowd in Poe. Marx 
speaks of the republic which in Europe "signifies, in general, only the political 
form of revolution of bourgeois society and not its conservative form of life — as, 
for example, in the United States of North America, where . . . classes . . . have 
not yet become fixed, . . . where the modern means of production . . . compen- 
sate for the relative deficiency of heads and hands, and where, finally, the fever- 
ish, youthful movement of material production . . . has left neither time nor 
opportunity for abolishing the old spirit world." Marx, Der achtzehnte Brumaire, 
p. 30. iW It is remarkable that Marx invokes the world of spirits to help explain the 
American republic. [J73,4] 

If the crowd is a veil, then the journalist draws it about him, exploiting his 
numerous connections like so many seductive arrangements of the cloth. 

[J73.5] 

The revolutionary by-elections of March 10, 1850, sent to the parliament in Paris 
an exclusively social-democratic mandate. But these elections would find "a senti- 
mental commentary in the April by-election, the election of Eugene Sue." Marx, 
Der achtzehnte Brumaire, p. 68.*°" [ J73,6] 

Apropos of "Le Crepuscule du matin." Marx sees in Napoleon III "a man who does 
not decide by night in order to execute by day, but who decides by day and exe- 
cutes by night." Marx, Der achtzehnte Brumaire, ed. Rjazanov, p. 79. 409 [J73a,l] 

Apropos of "Le Crepuscule du matin": "Paris is full of rumors of a coup d'etat. 
The capital is to be filled with troops during the night; the nextmorningis to bring 
decrees." Quoted from the European daily press of September and October 1851. 
Marx, Der achtzehnte Brumaire, p. 105. 110 [J73a,2] 

Marx calls the leaders of the Paris proletariat the "barricade commanders." Der 
achtzehnte Brumaire, p. 113. 111 [J73a,3] 

Sainte-Beuve's remark about Lamartine, whose poems represented the sky over 
Andre Chenier's landscapes (J51a,3), should be compared with the words of 
Marx: "While, in its accord with society, in its dependence on natural forces and 
its submission to the authority which protected it from above, the small holding 
that had newly come into being was naturally religious, the small holding that is 
ruined by debts, at odds with society and authority, and driven beyond its own 
limitations naturally becomes irreligious. Heaven was quite a pleasing accession 
to the narrow strip of land just won, more particularly as it makes the weather; it 
becomes an insult as soon as it is thrust forward as substitute for the small 
holding." Marx, Der achtzehnte Brumaire, p. 122. 112 Sainte-Beuve's analogy, com- 



bined with this passage from Marx, provides the key to the character and dura- 
tion of the political influence which Lamartine derived from his poetry. Com- 
pare, in this connection, his negotiations with the Russian ambassador, as 
reported by Pokrovski <cited in dl2,2>. [J73a,4] 

Ambiguity of the heroic in the figure of the poet: the poet has about him some- 
thing of the destitute soldier, something of the marauder. His fencing <Fechten> 
often recalls the meaning of this word 413 in the argot of vagabonds. [J73a,5] 

Marx on the parasitic creatures of the Second Empire: "Lest they make a mistake 
in the years, they count the minutes." Marx, Der achtzehnte Brumaire, p. 126. 114 

[J73a,6] 

Ambiguity of that conception of the heroic which is hidden in the Baudelairean 
image of the poet. "The culminating point of the idees napoleoniennes is the pre- 
ponderance of the army. The army was the point d'honneur of the small-holding 
peasants; it was they themselves transformed into heroes. . . . But the enemies 
against whom the French peasant has now to defend his property are . . . the tax 
collectors. The small holding lies no longer in the so-called fatherland, but in the 
register of mortgages. The army itself is no longer the flower of the peasant 
youth; it is the swamp-flower of the peasant lumpenproletariat. It consists in large 
measure of remplacants, of substitutes, just as the second Bonaparte is himself 
only a remplagant, the substitute for Napoleon. . . . One see that ALL idees 
napoleoniennes are ideas of the undeveloped small holding in the freshness of its 
youth; for the small holding that has outlived its day, they are an absurdity." 
Marx, Der achtzehnte Brumaire, ed. Rjazanov, pp. 122-123." 5 [J74,l] 

On Satanism: "When the puritans at the Council of Constance complained of the 
dissolute lives of the popes . . ., Cardinal Pierre d'Ailly thundered at them: 'Only 
the devil in person can still save the Catholic church, and you ask for angels.' In 
like manner, after the coup d'etat, the French bourgeoisie cried: Only the chief of 
the Society of December 10 can still save bourgeois society! Only theft can still save 
property! Only perjury can save religion! Only bastardy can save the family! Only 
disorder can save order!" Marx, Der achtzehnte Brumaire, ed. Rjazanov, 
p. 124. 415 [J74,2] 

"One can visualize clearly this upper stratum of the Society of December 10, if one 
reflects that Veron-Crevel is its preacher of morals and Granier de Cassagnac its 
thinker." Marx, Der achtzehnte Brumaire, ed. Rjazanov, p. 127. 1,7 [J74,3] 

The "magic cobbles piled for barricades," in Baudelaire's draft of an epilogue," 8 
define the limit which his poetry encounters in its immediate confrontation with 
social subjects. The poet says nothing of the hands which move these cobble- 
stones. In "Le Vin des chiffonniers," he was able to pass beyond this limit. 

[J74,4] 



Closing lines of "Le Vin des chiffonniers," in the version of 1852: "Already God 
had given them sweet sleep; / He added wine, divine son of the sun." The distinc- 
tion between God and man ("Man added wine . . .") dates from 1857. [J74a,l] 

In the last section of "Salon de 1846" (section 18, "De 1'Heroisme de la vie 
moderne"), suicide appears, characteristically, as a "particular passion" — the 
only one, among those mentioned, of any real significance. It represents the great 
conquest of modernity in the realm of passion: "Except for Hercules on Mount 
Oeta, Cato of Utica, and Cleopatra, . . . what suicides do you see in the paintings 
of the old masters?" Ch. B., Oeuures, vol. 2, pp. 133-134. 119 Suicide appears, then, 
as the quintessence of modernity. [ J74a,2] 

In section 17 of "Salon de 1846," Baudelaire speaks of "the funereal and rumpled 
frock coat of today" (p. 136); and, before that, of this "uniform livery of mourn- 
ing": "Do not these puckered creases, playing like serpents around the mortified 
flesh, have their own mysterious grace?" (p. 134). Ch. B., Oeuvres, vol. 2.' B0 

[J74a,3] 



Nietzsche on the winter of 1882-1883, on the Bay of Bapallo: "Mornings, I would 
walk in a southerly direction on the splendid road to Zoagli, going up past pines 
with a magnificent view of the sea; in the afternoon, ... I walked around the whole 
bay ... all the way to Portofino. This place and this scenery came even closer to 
my heart because of the great love that Emperor Frederick III felt for them. ... It 
was on these two walks that the whole of Zarathustra I occurred to me, and 
especially Zarathustra himself as a type. Rather, he overtook me." Friedrich 
Nietzsche, Also Sprach Zarathustra, ed. Kroner (Leipzig), pp. xx-xxi. Compare 
this with a description of the Fort du Taureau. ' 21 [J74a,4] 

Against the background of his "philosophy of the noontide" — the doctrine of 
eternal recurrence — Nietzsche defines the earlier stages of his thinking as philoso- 
phy of the dawn and philosophy of the morning. He, too, knows the "sectioning 
of time" and its great divisions. It is certainly legitimate to ask whether this 
apperception of time was not an element of Jugendstil. If in fact it was, then we 
would perhaps better understand how, in Ibsen, Jugendstil produced one of the 
greatest technicians of the drama. [J74a,5] 

The closer work comes to prostitution, the more tempting it is to conceive of 
prostitution as work — something that has been customaiy in the argot of whores 
for a long time now. Tliis rapprochement has advanced by giant steps in the 
wake of unemployment; the "Keep smiling" '" maintains, on the job market, the 
practice of the prostitute who, on the love market, flashes a smile at tire customer. 

[J75.1] 



The description of the labor process in its relation to nature will necessarily bear 
the imprint of its social structure as well. If the human being were not authentically 



exploited, we would be spared the inauthentic talk of an exploitation of nature. 
This talk reinforces the semblance of "value," which accrues to raw materials 
only by virtue of an order of production founded on the exploitation of human 
labor. Wfere this exploitation to come to a halt, work, in turn, could no longer be 
characterized as the exploitation of nature by man. It would henceforth be con- 
ducted on the model of children's play, which in Fourier forms the basis of the 
"impassioned work" of the Harmonians. To have instituted play as the canon of 
a labor no longer rooted in exploitation is one of the great merits of Fourier. Such 
work inspirited by play aims not at the propagation of values but at the ameliora- 
tion of nature. For it, too, the Fourierist Utopia furnishes a model, of a sort to be 
found realized in the games of children. It is the image of an earth on which every 
place has become an inn. The double meaning of the word <Wirtschifi> blossoms 
here: all places are worked by human hands, made useful and beautiful thereby; 
all, however, stand, like a roadside inn, open to all. An earth that was cultivated 
according to such an image would cease to be part of "a world where action is 
never the sister of dream." 123 On that earth, the act would be kin to the dream. 

[J75.2] 

Fashion determines, in each case, the acceptable limit of empathy. [ J75,3] 

The unfolding of work in play presupposes highly developed forces of produc- 
tion, such as only today stand at the disposal of humanity, and stand mobilized in 
a direction contrary to their possibilities — that is, they are poised for an emer- 
gency. Nevertheless, even in times of relatively undeveloped productivity, the 
murderous idea of the exploitation of nature, which has ruled over things since 
the nineteenth century, was in no sense determinative. Certainly tliis idea could 
have no place so long as the prevailing image of nature was that of the minister- 
ing mother, as reflected in Bachofen's conception of matriarchal societies. In the 
figure of the mother, tliis image has survived the inconstancies of history, though 
it obviously has grown more blurred during those periods in which mothers 
themselves become agents of the class that risks the life of their sons for its 
commercial interests. There is much to suggest that the second marriage of 
Baudelaire's mother was not made any more bearable for him by the fact that she 
elected to marry a general. This marriage evidently has a share in the evolution 
of the poet's libido; if the whore became the mastering image of the latter, this 
marriage plays its part. Of course, the whore is, fundamentally, the incarnation of 
a nature suffused with commodity appearance. She has even intensified its power 
of delusion insofar as, in commerce with her, an always fictive pleasure arises, 
one that is supposed to corresond to the pleasure of her partner. In other words, 
the capacity for pleasure itself now figures as a value in tliis commerce — as the 
object of an exploitation perpetrated no less by her than by her partner. On the 
other hand, one sees here the distorted, more than life-size image of an availabil- 
ity that holds for everyone and is discouraged by none. The unworldly ecstatic 
lasciviousness of the Baroque poet Lohenstein has stamped tliis image in a man- 
ner that is highly reminiscent of Baudelaire: "A beautiful woman, yes, arrayed in 



a thousand splendors, / Is a sumptuous table where the many sup and take their 
fill, / An inexhaustible wellspring of never failing waters, / Yes, of love's sweet 
milk; and from a hundred conduits / The luscious nectar runs" (Daniel Caspers 
von Lohenstein, Agrippina [Leipzig, 1724], p. 33). The "beyond" of the choice 
governing relations between mother and child, and the here and now of the 
choice governing relations between prostitute and client, make contact at a single 
point. This point defines the situation of Baudelaire's libido. (Compare X2,l: 
Marx on prostitution.) [ J75a] 



The lines from "Selige Sehnsucht" — "No distance can weigh you down, / You 
come flying, fascinated" 424 — describe the experience of the aura. The distance that 
is there in the eyes of the beloved and that draws the lover after it is the dream of 
a better nature. The decline of the aura and the waning of the dream of a better 
nature — this latter conditioned on its defensive position in the class struggle — are 
one and the same. It follows that the decline of the aura and the decline of sexual 
potency are also, at bottom, one. [J76,l] 



Hie formula of LEternite par les astres — "The new is always old, and the old 
always new" 42 '' — corresponds most rigorously to the experience of spleen regis- 
tered by Baudelaire. [ J76,2] 



A passage from LEternite par les astres — "The number of our doubles is infinite 
in time and space. . . . These doubles exist in flesh and bone — indeed, in trousers 
and jacket, in crinoline and chignon" — may be compared with "Les Sept Vieil- 
lards": 

Doubtless to you my dread seems ludicrous, 
unless a brotherly shudder lets you see: 
for all their imminent decrepitude, 
these seven monsters had eternal life! 

I doubt if I could have survived an eighth 
such apparition, father and son of himself, 
inexorable Phoenix, loathsome avatar! 
— I turned my back on the whole danmed parade. 

The "monstrous shoreless sea," 126 which the poem evokes in the closing line, is 
the agitated universe of LEternite par les astres. [J76,3] 



"The houses seemed to be stretched upward by the mist / and looked like the two 
quays of some swollen river." 427 An image reminiscent of Meryon. There is some- 
thing similar in Brecht. [ J76.4] 



With gloomy irony, Blanqui demonstrates what a "better humanity" would be 
worth in a nature which can never be better. [ J76,5] 



Lamartine's industrial Christ reappears at the end of the century. Thus Ver- 
haeren, in "Le Depart": 

And what would evils matter, and demented hours, 

And vats of vice in which the city ferments, 

If one day, from the depths of fogs and shadows, 

A new Christ rises, sculpted in light, 

Who lifts humanity toward him 

And baptizes it in the fire of newborn stars.* 28 

Baudelaire was not possessed of any such optimism — and that was the great 
chance for his presentation of Paris. Cited in Jules Destree, "Der Zug nach der 
Stadt" Die neue Zpit, 21, no. 2 (Stuttgart, 1903) <p. 571 >. [J76.6] 

In the historical action which the proletariat brings against the bourgeois class, 
Baudelaire is a witness; but Blanqui is an expert witness. [J76a, 1] 

If Baudelaire is summoned before the tribunal of history, he will have to put up 
with a great many interruptions; an interest that is in many respects foreign to 
him, and in many respects incomprehensible to him, conditions the line of ques- 
tioning. Blanqui, on the other hand, has long since made the question on which 
he speaks entirely his own; hence, he appears as an expert where this question is 
tried. It is therefore not exactly in the same capacity that Baudelaire and Blanqui 
are cited to appear before the tribunal of history. (Compare Nll,3.) [J76a,2] 

Abandonment of the epic moment: a tribunal is no sewing circle. Or better: the 
proceedings are instituted, not reported. [J76a,3] 

The interest which the materialist historian takes in the past is always, in part, a 
vital interest in its being past — in its having ceased to exist, its being essentially 
dead. To have certified this condition with respect to the whole is the indispensa- 
ble prerequisite for any citation (any calling to life) of particular parts of this 
phenomenon of what-has-been. In a word: for the specific historical interest 
whose legitimacy it is up to the materialist historian to establish, it must be shown 
that one is dealing with an object which in its entirety, actually and irrevocably, 
"belongs to history." [J76a,4] 

The comparison with Dante can serve both as an example of the perplexity of 
the early reception of Baudelaire and as an illustration of Joseph de Maistre's 
remark that the earliest judgments concerning an author are bequeathed to the 
subsequent criticism. <SeeJ64a,4.> [J76a,5] 



In addition to the Dante comparison, the concept of decadence figures as a key- 
word in the reception. It is there in Barbey d'Aurevilly, Pontinartin, Brunetiere, 
Bourget. [J76a,6] 



For the materialist dialectician, discontinuity is the regulative idea of the tradition 
of the ruling classes (and therefore, primarily, of the bourgeoisie) ; continuity, the 
regulative idea of the tradition of the oppressed (and therefore, primarily, of the 
proletariat). The proletariat lives more slowly than the bourgeois class. The 
examples of its champions, the perceptions of its leaders, do not grow old, or, at 
any rate, they grow old much more slowly than the epochs and great personages 
of the bourgeois class. The waves of fashion break against the compact mass of 
the downtrodden. The movements of the ruling class, by contrast, having once 
come into their ascendancy, maintain in themselves a reference to fashion. In 
particular, the ideologies of the rulers are by their nature more changeable than 
the ideas of the oppressed. For not only must they, like the ideas of the latter, 
adapt each time to the situation of social conflict, but they must glorify that 
situation as fundamentally harmonious. Such a business is managed only eccen- 
trically and desultorily; it is modish in the fullest sense of the word. To undertake 
to "salvage" the great figures of the bourgeoisie means, not least, to conceive 
them in this most unstable dimension of their operation, and precisely from out 
of that to extract, to cite, what has remained inconspicuously buried beneath — 
being, as it was, of so little help to the powerful. To bring together Baudelaire and 
Blanqui means removing the bushel that is covering the light.' 120 [J77, 1] 

Baudelaire's reception by poets can be easily distinguished from his reception by 
theorists. The latter adhere to the comparison with Dante and the concept of 
decadence; the former, to the maxim of art for art's sake and the theory of 
correspondences. (J77,2] 

Faguet (where?) sees the secret of Baudelaire's influence in the extremely wide- 
spread chronic nervousness. [J77,3] 

Tiie "jerky gait" of the ragpicker <see ]79a,5> is not necessarily due to the effect of 
alcohol. Every few moments, he must stop to gather refuse, which he throws into 
his wicker basket. [ J77,4] 

For Blanqui, history is the straw with which infinite time is stuffed. [J77a, 1] 

"I come to a stop, for I am suddenly exhausted. Up ahead, it appears, the path 
descends without warning, precipitously: On all sides, ahyss — I dare not look." 
Nietzsche, <Werke: Gross- unci Kleinoktavausgabe,> vol. 12, p. 223 (cited in Karl 
Lowith, Nietzsches Philosophie der eivigen Wiederkunft des Gleichen [Berlin, 
1935], p. 33). [J77a,2] 



The hero who asserts himself on the stage of modernity is, in fact, an actor first of 
all. He clearly appears as such in "Les Sept Vieillards," in a "scene to match the 
actor's plight," "steeling" his "nerves to play a hero's part." 430 [J77a,3] 



The figure of the poet in "Benediction" is a figure from Jugendstil. The poet 
appears, so to speak, in the nude. He displays the physiognomy of Joseph 
Delorme. [J77a,4] 



The "natural benevolence" which Magnin (J50a,4) celebrates in Sainte-Beuve — 
his coziness, in short — is the complement of the hieratic bearing of Joseph 
Delorme. [J 77a, 5] 

It can be seen from the portraits that Baudelaire's physiognomy very early 
showed the marks of old age. Among other things, this accounts for the oft-noted 
resemblance between his features and those of prelates. [J77a,6] 

Valles was perhaps the first to complain insistently (as Souday would do later) 
about Baudelaire's "backwardness" (J21,6). [J77a,7] 

Allegory recognizes many enigmas, but it knows no mystery. An enigma is a 
fragment that, together with another, matching fragment, makes up a whole. 
Mystery, on the other hand, was invoked from time immemorial in the image of 
the veil, which is an old accomplice of distance. Distance appears veiled. Now, 
the painting of the Baroque — unlike that of the Renaissance, for example — has 
nothing at all to do with this veil. Indeed, it ostentatiously rends the veil and, as 
its ceiling frescoes in particular demonstrate, brings even the distance of the skies 
into a nearness, one that seeks to startle and confound. Tliis suggests that the 
degree of auratic saturation of human perception has fluctuated widely in the 
course of history. (In the Baroque, one might say, the conflict between cult value 
and exhibition value was variously played out within the confines of sacred art 
itself.) While these fluctuations await further clarification, the supposition arises 
that epochs which tend toward allegorical expression will have experienced a 
crisis of the aura. [J77a,8] 

Baudelaire mentions, among the "lyric subjects proposed by the Academie," 
"Algeria, or the conquering civilization." Ch. B., Oeuvres, vol. 2, p. 593 ("L'Esprit 
de M. Villemain"). Desecration of distance. [ J78, 1] 

On the "abyss": "depths of space, allegorical of the depths of time." Ch. B., 
Oeuvres, vol. 1, p. 306 (Les Paradis artificiels, "L'Homme-dieu").' 1 '" [J78,2] 

Allegorical dismemberment. The music to which one listens under the influence 
of hashish appears, in Baudelaire, as "the entire poem entering your brain, like a 
dictionary that has come alive." Ch. B., Oeuvres, vol. 1, p. 3#7- W2 [J78,3] 

During the Baroque, a formerly incidental component of allegory, the emblem, 
undergoes extravagant development. If, for die materialist historian, the medie- 
val origin of allegory still needs elucidation, Marx himself furnishes a clue for 



understanding its Baroque form. He writes in Das Kapital (Hamburg, 1922), vol. 
1, p. 344: "The collective machine . . . becomes more and more perfect, the more 
the process as a whole becomes a continuous one — that is, the less the raw 
material is interrupted in its passage from its first phase to its last; in other words, 
the more its passage from one phase to another is effected not only by the hand 
of man but by the machinery itself. In manufacture, the isolation of each detail 
process is a condition imposed by the nature of division of labor, but in the fully 
developed factory the continuity of those processes is, on the contrary, impera- 
tive." 133 Here may be found the key to the Baroque procedure whereby meanings 
are conferred on the set of fragments, on the pieces into which not so much the 
whole as the process of its production has disintegrated. Baroque emblems may 
be conceived as half finished products which, from the phases of a production 
process, have been converted into monuments to the process of destruction. 
During the Thirty "fears' War, which, now at one point and now at another, 
immobilized production, the "interruption" that, according to Marx, charac- 
terizes each particular stage of this labor process could be protracted almost 
indefinitely. But the real triumph of the Baroque emblematic, the chief exhibit of 
which becomes the death's head, is the integration of man himself into the 
operation. The death's head of Baroque allegory is a half-finished product of 
the history of salvation, that process interrupted — so far as this is given him to 
realize — by Satan. [J78,4] 

The financial min of Baudelaire is the consequence of a quixotic struggle against 
the circumstances that, in his day, determined consumption. The individual con- 
sumer, who vis-a-vis the artisan commissions work, figures in the marketplace as 
customer. There he does his part in the clearance of a stock of commodities 
which his particular wishes have had no influence whatsoever in producing. 
Baudelaire wanted to have such particular wishes reflected not only in his choice 
of clothing — the tailor's was, of all the branches of business, the one that had to 
reckon longest with the consumer who commissions work — but also in his furni- 
ture and in other objects of his daily use. He thus became dependent on an 
antiquary who was less than honest, and who procured for him paintings and 
antique furniture that in some cases proved to be lakes. The debts which he 
incurred through these dealings weighed on him for the rest of his life. [J78a, 1] 

In the final analysis, the image of petrified unrest called up by allegory is a 
historical image. It shows the forces of antiquity and of Christianity suddenly 
arrested in their contest, turned to stone amid unallayed hostilities. In his poem 
on the sick muse, with its masterful verse that hetrays nothing of the chimerical 
nature of the poet's wish, Baudelaire has devised, as ideal image of the muse's 
health, what is really a formula for her distress: "I'd wish . . . / Your Christian 
blood to flow in waves that scan / With varied sounds of ancient syllables." 434 

[J78a,2] 



In the poetry of Baudelaire, notwithstanding the new and original signature 
which allegory inscribes there, a medieval substrate makes itself felt beneath the 
Baroque element. This involves what Bezold calls "the survival of the ancient 
gods in medieval humanism."* 35 Allegory is the vehicle for this survival. [J79,l] 

At the moment when the production process closes itself off to people, the stock 
in trade becomes accessible to them — in the form of the department store. 

[J79,2] 

On the theory of dandyism. The tailor's is the last line of business in which the 
customer is still catered to on an individual basis. Story of the twelve frock 
coats. ' 36 More and more, the person commissioning work plays a heroic role. 

[J79.3] 

Insofar as the flaneur presents himself in the marketplace, his flanerie reflects the 
fluctuations of commodities. Grandville, in his drawings, has often depicted the 
adventures of the strolling commodity. [ J79,4] 

On the phrase "racked by their labors":' 13 ' with the Saint-Simonians, industrial 
labor is seen in the light of sexual intercourse; the idea of the joy of working is 
patterned after an image of the pleasure of procreation. Two decades later, the 
relation has been reversed: the sex act itself is marked by the joylessness which 
oppresses the industrial worker. [J79.5] 

It would be an error to think of the experience contained in the correspondances as 
a simple counterpart to certain experiments with synesthesia (with hearing colors 
or seeing sounds) that have been conducted in psychologists' laboratories. In 
Baudelaire's case, it is a matter less of the well-known reactions, about which 
effete or snobbish art criticism has made such a fuss, than of the medium in 
which such reactions occur. This medium is the memory, and with Baudelaire it 
was possessed of unusual density. The corresponding sensory data correspond in 
it; they are teeming with memories, which run so thick that they seem to have 
arisen not from this life at all but from some more spacious vie anterieure. It is this 
prior existence that is intimated by the "familiar eyes" 438 with which such experi- 
ences scrutinize the one who has them. [J79,6] 

What fundamentally distinguishes the brooder from the thinker is that the for- 
mer not only meditates a thing but also meditates his meditation of the thing. 
The case of the brooder is that of the man who has arrived at the solution of a 
great problem but then has forgotten it. And now he broods — not so much over 
the matter itself as over his past reflections on it. The brooder's thinking, there- 
fore, bears the imprint of memory. Brooder and allegorist are cut from the same 
cloth. [J79a,l] 



"While the parliamentary party of Order . . . destroy[ed] with its own hands, in 
the struggle against the other classes of society, all the conditions for its own 
regime, the parliamentary regime, the extraparliamentary mass of the bourgeoi- 
sie, on the other hand, ... by its brutal maltreatment of its own press, invited 
Bonaparte to suppress and annihilate its speaking and writing section, its politi- 
cians and its literati, ... in order that it might then be able to pursue its private 
affairs with full confidence in the protection of a strong and unrestricted govern- 
ment." Karl Marx, Der achtzehnte Brumaire des Louis Bonaparte, ed. Rjazanov 



Baudelaire is quite as isolated in the literary world of his day as Blanqui is in the 



With the increase in displays of merchandise and with the rise, in particular, of 
magasins de nouveautes, the physiognomy of the commodity emerged more and 
more distinctly. Of course, even with his sensitive receptivity, Baudelaire never 
would have registered this development had it not passed like a magnet over the 
"precious metal of our will,"'" 0 over the iron ore of his imagination. In fact, the 
ruling figure of that imagination — allegory — corresponded perfectly to the com- 
modity fetish. [J79a,4] 

The bearing of the modern hero, as modeled on the ragpicker: his "jerky gait," 
the necessary isolation in which he goes about his business, the interest he takes 
in the refuse and detritus of the great city. (Compare Baudelaire, "De l'Heroisme 
de la vie moderne," in vol. 2, p. 135: "The pageant of . . . life . . .")' M1 [J79a,5] 

The uncovering of the mechanical aspects of the organism is a persistent ten- 
dency of the sadist. One can say that the sadist is bent on replacing the human 
organism with the image of machinery. Sade is the offspring of an age that was 
enraptured by automatons. And La Mettrie's "man machine" alluded to the 
guillotine, which furnished rudimentary proof of its truths. In his bloody-minded 
fantasies, Joseph de Maistre — Baudelaire's authority on matters political — is 
cousin to the marquis de Sade. [J80, 1] 

The brooder's memory ranges over the indiscriminate mass of dead lore. Human 
knowledge, within this memory, is something piecemeal — in an especially preg- 
nant sense: it is like the jumble of arbitrarily cut pieces from which a puzzle is 
assembled. An epoch fundamentally averse to brooding has nonetheless pre- 
served its outward gesture in the puzzle. It is the gesture, in particular, of the 
allegorist. Through the disorderly fund which his knowledge places at his dis- 
posal, the allegorist rummages here and there for a particular piece, holds it next 
to some other piece, and tests to see if they fit together — that meaning with this 
image or this image with that meaning. The result can never be known before- 
hand, for there is no natural mediation between the two. But this is just how 
matters stand with commodity and price. The "metaphysical subtleties" in which 



(Vienna and Berlin <1927>), p. 100. 4 



[J79a,2] 



world of conspiracies. 



[J79a,3] 



the commodity delights, according to Marx, 112 are, above all, the subtleties of 
price formation. How the price of goods in each case is arrived at can never quite 
be foreseen, neither in the course of their production nor later when they enter 
the market. It is exactly the same with the object in its allegorical existence. At no 
point is it written in the stars that the allegoiist's profundity will lead it to one 
meaning rather than another. And though it once may have acquired such a 
meaning, this can always be withdrawn in favor of a different meaning. The 
modes of meaning fluctuate almost as rapidly as the price of commodities. In fact, 
the meaning of the commodity is its price; it has, as commodity, no other mean- 
ing. Hence, the allegorist is in his element with commercial wares. As flaneur, he 
has empathized with the soul of the commodity; as allegorist, he recognizes in the 
"price tag," with which the merchandise comes on the market, the object of his 
broodings — the meaning. The world in which this newest meaning lets him settle 
has grown no friendlier. An inferno rages in the soul of the commodity, for all the 
seeming tranquillity lent it by the price. [J80,2; J80a, 1] 

On fetishism: "It may be that, in the emblem of the stone, only the most obvious 
features of the cold, dry earth are to he seen. But it is quite conceivable and ... by 
no means improbable that the inert mass contains a reference to the genuinely 
theological conception of the melancholic which is found in one of the seven deadly 
sins. This is acedia." < Walter Benjainin,> Ur sprung des deutschen Trailer spiels 
<Berlin, 1928>,p. 151. 443 [J80a,2] 

On "the exploitation of nature" (J75,2): such exploitation was not always re- 
garded as the basis of human labor. To Nietzsche, it quite rightly seemed worthy 
of remark that Descartes was the first philosophical physicist who "compared the 
discoveries of the scientist to a military campaign waged against nature." Cited in 
Karl Lowith, Nietzsches Phibsophie der ewigen Wiederkunft des Gleichen (Berlin, 
1935), p. 121 (<Nietzsche, Werke, Gross- und Klein oktavausgabe ,> vol. 13, p. 55). 

[J80a,3] 

Nietzsche calls Heraclitus "a star devoid of atmosphere. "* M Cited in Lowith, 
Nietzsches Philosophie, p. 110 (vol. 1«, pp. 45ff.). [J80a,4] 

The great physiognomic similarity between Guys and Nietzsche is worth empha- 
sizing. Nietzsche ascribes to the pessimism of India "that tremendous, yearning 
rigidity of expression in which die Nothing is reflected" (cited in Lowith, 
Nietzsches Philosophie, p. 108 [vol. 15, p. 162]). 4 ' 15 Compare this to the way Baude- 
laire describes the gaze of the oriental courtesan in Guys (J47,4): it is a gaze 
directed toward the horizon, one in which rigid attentiveness and profound 
distraction are united. [ J80 a, 5] 



On suicide as signature of modernity. "One cannot sufficiently condemn Christian- 
ity for having devalued the value of such a great purifying nihilistic movement, as 
was perhaps already being formed, . . . through continual deterrence from the 



deed of nihilism, which is suicide" (cited in Lowith, Nietzsches Philosophic, p. 108 
<vol. 15, pp. 325, 186>). w < [J81, 1] 



On the ahyss, and on the phrase "I balk at sleep as if it were a hole": "Do you know 
the terror which assails him who is falling asleep? — He is terrified down to his toes, 
because the ground seems to give way, and the dream begins" (<Nietzsche,> 
Zarathustra, ed. Kroner [Leipzig], p. 215). 417 [ J8 1,2] 

Comparison of the "sinuous lleece" with the "deep and spreading starless Night!" 
(final lines of "Les Promesses d'nn visage"). 1,8 [J8 1,3] 

The particulars of the boulevard press are, later, the sum and substance of the 
stock market reports. Through the role that it gives to the talk of the town, the 
petite presse paves the way for this stock market information. [J8 1,4] 

His confederates obstruct reality for the conspirator as the masses do for the 
flaneur. [J81.5] 

On the flight of images in allegory. It often cheated Baudelaire out of part of the 
returns on his allegorical imagery. One thing in particular is missing in Baude- 
laire's employment of allegory. This we can recognize if we call to mind Shelley's 
great allegory on the city of London: the third part of "Peter Bell the Third," in 
which London is presented to the reader as hell. <See M18.> The incisive effect of 
this poem depends, for the most part, on the fact that Shelley's grasp of allegory 
makes itself felt. It is this grasp that is missing in Baudelaire. This grasp, which 
makes palpable the distance of the modern poet from allegory, is precisely what 
enables allegory to incorporate into itself the most immediate realities. With what 
directness that can happen is best shown by Shelley's poem, in which bailiffs, 
parliamentarians, stock-jobbers, and many other types figure. The allegory, in its 
emphatically antique character, gives them all a sure footing, such as, for exam- 
ple, the businessmen in Baudelaire's "Crepuscule du soir" do not have. — Shelley 
rules over the allegory, whereas Baudelaire is ruled by it. [ J8 1,6] 

Individuality, as such, takes on heroic outlines as the masses step more decisively 
into the picture. This is the origin of the conception of the hero in Baudelaire. In 
Hugo, it is a matter not of the isolated individual as such but of the democratic 
citizen. That implies a fundamental difference between the two poets. The resolu- 
tion of this discord would have, as precondition, the dispelling of the illusion 
<Schein> which it reflects. This illusory appearance comes from the concept of the 
masses. Considered apart from the various classes which join in its formation, 
the mass as such has no primary social significance. Its secondary significance 
depends on the ensemble of relations through which it is constituted at any one 
time and place. A theater audience, an army, the population of a city comprise 
masses which in themselves helong to no particular class. The free market multi- 
plies these masses, rapidly and on a colossal scale, insofar as each piece of 



merchandise now gathers around it the mass of its potential buyers. Hie totalitar- 
ian states have taken this mass as their model. The Volksgemeinschaft <People's 
Community) aims to root out from single individuals everything that stands in 
the way of their wholesale fusion into a mass of consumers. The one implacable 
adversary still confronting the state, which in this ravenous action becomes the 
agent of monopoly capital, is the revolutionary proletariat. This latter dispels the 
illusion of the mass through the reality of class. Neither Hugo nor Baudelaire 
could be directly at its side for that. [J81a,l] 

On the inauguration of the heroine: Baudelaire's antiquity is Roman antiquity. At 
only one point — and it is, of course, irreplaceable — does Greek antiquity break 
into his world. Greece presents him with that image of the heroine which ap- 
peared to him worthy and capable of being carried over into modernity. Greek 
names stand at the head <?> of one of his greatest poems: "Femmes danmees: 
Delphine et Hippolyte." The heroine <is endowed> with the features of lesbian 
dove >. [J81a,2] 

"Thus, the poet's thought, after meandering capriciously, opens onto the vast 
perspectives of the past or future; but these skies are too vast to he everywhere 
pure, and the temperature of the climate too warm not to brew storms. The idle 
passerby, who contemplates these areas veiled in mourning, feels tears of hysteria 
come to his eyes." Ch. B., vol. 2, p. 536 ("Marceline Desbordes-Valmore"). +w 

[J82.1] 

On "Le Vm des chiffonniers": the reference to "police spies" suggests that the 
ragman dreams of returning to combat on the barricades. [ J82,2] 

" City. I am an ephemeral and not-too-discontented citizen of a metropolis obvi- 
ously modern because every known taste has been avoided in the furnishings 
and in the outsides of the houses, as well as in the layout of the city. Here you 
would not discover the least sign of any monument of superstition. In short, 
morals and speech are reduced to their simplest expression. These millions of 
people, who have no need of knowing one another, conduct their education, 
their trade, and their old age with such similarity that the duration of their lives 
must be several times shorter than is the case, according to some insane statistics, 
with people on the continent." Arthur Rimbaud, Oeuvres (Paris, 1924), pp. 229- 
230 (illuminations):^ Disenchantment of "modernity" ! [ J82,3] 

"Criminals disgust me as if they were castrates." Arthur Rimbaud, Oeuvres 
(Paris, 1924), p. 258 (Une Saison en enfer, "Mauvais Sang").' 151 [J82,4] 



One could try to show, using the example of Baudelaire, that Jugendstil arises out 
of weariness — a weariness that manifests itself, in his case, as that of the mime 
who has taken off his makeup. [ J82,5] 



Modernity, in this work, is what a trademark is on a piece of cutlery or an optical 
instrument. It may be as durable as one could wish; if the company which 
produced it at some point goes under, it will come to seem obsolete. But to 
impress a trademark on his work was Baudelaire's avowed intention, "To create a 
poncif."' ioi And perhaps, for Baudelaire, there is no higher honor than to have 
imitated, to have reproduced, with his work this state of affairs, one of the most 
profane of all in the commodity economy. Perhaps this is Baudelaire's greatest 
achievement, and certainly it is one of which he is conscious: to have become so 
quickly obsolete while remaining so durable. [ J82, 6; J82a, 1] 

The activity of the conspirator can be considered a sort of uprooting, comparable 
to that occasioned by the monotony and terror of the Second Empire. [ J82a,2] 

The physiologies 153 were the 6rst booty taken from the marketplace by the 
flaneur — who, so to speak, went botanizing on the asphalt. [J82a,3] 

Modernity has its antiquity, like a nightmare that has come to it in its sleep. 13 '' 

[J82a,4] 

England remained, until late in the previous century, the graduate school of 
social consciousness. From there, Barbier brought back his cycle of poems enti- 
tled Laiare <Lazarus> and Gavarni his sequence Ce qu'an voit gratis a Londres 
<What Can Be Seen for Free in London>, together with his character Thomas 
Vireloque, the figure of hopeless destitution. [J82a,5] 

Between Augustus, calm of eye, and Trajan, pure of brow, 
Resplendent and umnoving in the great azure, 
On you, O pantheons, on you, O portals, 
Robert Macaire with his worn-out boots! 

Victor Hugo, Les Chatiments, ed. Charpentier (Paris), p. 107 ("Apotheose"). 

[J82a,6] 

"He has against him . . . the title of Les Fleurs du mal, which is a sham title, 
disagreeably anecdotal, and which particularizes to excess the universality of his 
impulse." Henry Bataille, "Baudelaire," Comoedia (January 7, 1921). [J82a,7] 

Apropos of "the nearly deafening street'" 55 and other similar expressions, it 
should not be forgotten that the roads in those days were generally paved in 
cobblestone. [J82a,8] 

Nisard in the foreword to the first edition of Le Poetes latins de la decadence 
(1834): "I endeavor to explain by what necessities . . . the human spirit arrives at 
this singular state of exhaustion, in which the most bountiful imaginations are no 
longer capable of true poetry and can manage only to debase their languages with 
scandal. ... In conclusion, I touch on certain resemblances between the poetry of 



our time and that of the time of Lucan. ... In a country where literature governs 
the minds of men, and even politics . . . lends its voice to everything progres- 
sive, . . . criticism ... is ... a task at once literary and moral." D. Nisard, Etudes 
de moeurs et de critique sur les poetes latins de la decadence (Paris, 1849), vol. 1, 
pp.x, xiv. [J83.1] 

On the feminine ideal — "ghastly thin" — of Baudelaire: "But it is essentially the 
modern woman here, the French woman of the period preceding the invention of 
the hicycle." Pierre Caume, "Causeries sur Baudelaire, La Nouvelle Revue 
(Paris, 1899), vol. 119, p. 669. [J83,2] 

Nisard denounces, as a sign of decadence in Phaedrus, "a continual, affected 
employment of the abstract for the concrete. . . . Thus, instead of a long neck, he 
says: 'length of neck,' colli longitude-." D. Nisard, Etudes de moeurs et de critique 
sur les poetes latins de la decadence (Paris, 1849), vol. 1, pp. 45. [ J83,3] 

On the question of the declining birthrate and of harrenness: "There is no hopeful 
expectation of the future, nor any elan, without some guiding idea, some goal." 
Jules Romaiiis, Cela depend devous (Paris <1939>), p. 104. [ J83,4] 

"Into the depths of the Unknown" — with this, compare the great passage by 
Turgot on the known: "I cannot admire Columbus for having said, 'The earth is 
round, and therefore by traveling westward I shall meet the land again,' because 
the simplest things are often the most difficult to find. — But what distinguishes a 
hardy soul is the confidence with which it abandons itself to unknown waters on 
the faith of a deduction. What would genius and enthusiasm for truth be in a 
man to whom a known truth had given such courage!" Turgot, Oeuures (Paris, 
1844), vol. 2, p. 675 ("Pensees et fragments"). 456 [J83,5] 

Being reduced to rags is a specific form of poverty — by no means the superlative 
form. "Poverty takes on the peculiar character of raggedness when it occurs 
amidst a society whose existence is founded on an intricate and richly articulated 
system for the satisfaction of needs. Insofar as poverty borrows bits and pieces 
from this system, fragments isolated from all context, it becomes subject to needs 
from wliich it can find no . . . lasting and decent deliverance." Hermann Lotze, 
Mikrokosmos, vol 3 (Leipzig, 1864), pp. 271-272. 457 [J83a,l] 

Lotze's reflections on the worker who no longer handles a tool but operates a 
macliine aptly illuminate the attitude of the consumer toward the commodity 
produced under these conditions. "I Ie could still recognize in every contour of 
the finished product the power and precision of liis own formative touch. The 
participation of the individual in the work of the macliine, by contrast, is limited 
to . . . manual operations wliich bring forth nothing directly but merely supply to 
an inscrutable mechanism the obscure occasion for invisible accomplishments." 
Hermann Lotze, Mikrokosmos, vol. 3 (Leipzig, 1864), pp. 272-273. [J83a,2] 



Allegory, as the sign that is pointedly set off against its meaning, has its place in 
art as the antithesis to the beautiful appearance <Schein> in which signifier and 
signified flow into each other. Dissolve this brittleness of allegory, and it forfeits 
all authority. That, in fact, is what happens with genre. It introduces "life" into 
allegories, which in turn suddenly wither like flowers. Sternberger has touched 
on this state of affairs [Panorama <Hamburg, 1938>, p. 66): "the allegory that has 
become a semblance of life, that has given up its lastingness and its rigorous 
validity for the red pottage" of life, 458 justly appears as a creation of the genre. In 
Jugendstil, a retrogressive process seems to set in. Allegory regains its brittleness. 

[J83a,3] 

On the foregoing remarks by Lotze: the idler, the flaneur, who no longer has any 
understanding of production, seeks to become an expert on the market (on 
prices). [J83a,4] 

"The chapters 'Persecution' and 'Murder' in Apollinaire's Poete assassine con- 
tain the famous description of a pogrom against poets. Publishing houses are 
stormed, books of poems thrown on the fire, poets beaten to death. And the same 
scenes are taking place at the same time all over the world. In Aragon, 'Imagina- 
tion,' in anticipation of such horrors, marshals its forces for a last crusade." 
Walter Benjamin, "Der Surrealismus," Die literarische Welt, 5, no. 7 (February 
15, 1929).' 159 [J84.1] 

"It is hardly a coincidence that the century which has long been that of the 
strongest poetic language, the nineteenth century, has also been that of decisive 
progress in the sciences." Jean-Richard Bloch, "Langage d'utilite, langage 
poetique" [Encyclopedic francaue, vol. 16 [16-50], p. 13). Indicate how the forces 
of poetic inspiration, having been driven from their earlier positions by science, 
were compelled to make inroads into the commodity world. [ J84,2] 

On the question raised by J.-R. Bloch, the question of the development of science 
and of poetic language, Chenier's "Invention": 

All the arts conjoin, and human science 
Could not extend the bounds of its alliance 
Without enlarging thus the scope for verse. 
What long travail to win the universe! 



A new Cybele and a hundred different worlds befall 
Our Jasons first delivered from the ocean's thrall: 
What a wealth of worthy scenes, of images sublime, 

Born of those great subjects reserved for our time! [ J84,3] 

On "Les Sept Vieillards." The very fact that this poem stands isolated within 
Baudelaire's oeuvre fortifies the assumption that it occupies a key position there. 
If this position has remained unnoticed until now, this may have to do with the 



fact that a purely philological commentary has missed the mark with this poem. 
Yet the relevant datum is not so far afield. The piece corresponds with a particu- 
lar passage from Les Paradis artifiaels. It is this passage, however, that can shed 
light on the philosophical import of the poem. [ J84,4] 

The following passage from Les Paradis artifiaels is decisive for "Les Sept Vieil- 
lards." It makes it possible to trace the inspiration for this poem back to hashish: 
"The word 'rhapsodic,' which so well portrays a train of thought suggested and 
dictated by the outer world and the hazard of circumstance, has a great and more 
terrible truth in relation to hashish. Here, human reason becomes mere flotsam, 
at the mercy of all currents, and the train of thought is infinitely more accelerated 
and 'rhapsodic.'" Vol. 1 , p. 303. 460 [ J84a,l] 

Comparison between Blanqui and Baudelaire, in part deriving from Brecht's 
formulations: the defeat of Blanqui was the victory of Baudelaire — of the petty 
bourgeoisie. Blanqui succumbed; Baudelaire succeeded. Blanqui appears as a 
tragic figure; his betrayal has tragic greatness; he was brought down by the 
enemy within. Baudelaire appears as a comic figure — as the cock whose triumphal 
crowing announces the hour of betrayal. 461 [J84a,2] 

If Napoleon III was Caesar, then Baudelaire was the Catilinarian existence. 

[J84a,3] 

Baudelaire unites the poverty of the ragpicker with the scorn of the cadger and 
the despair of the parasite. [J84a,4] 

The significance of the prose poem "Perte d'aureole" cannot be overestimated. 
First of all, there is the remarkable pertinence of the fact that it spotlights the 
threat to the aura posed by the experience of shock. (Perhaps this relation can be 
clarified by reference to metaphors of epilepsy.) Extraordinarily decisive, more- 
over, is the ending, which makes the exhibition of the aura from now on an affair 
of fif th-rate poets. — Finally, this piece is important because in it the inhabitant of 
the big city appears menaced more by the traffic of coaches than he is nowadays 
by automobiles. [ J84a,5] 

Catiline figures in Baudelaire among the dandies.' 152 [J85,l] 
Love for the prostitute is the apotheosis of empathy with the commodity. 

[J85,2] 

"Recueillement" should be presented as Jugendstil poetry. The defuntes annees 
<dead years>' l<B as allegories in the style of Fritz Erler. [ J85,3] 



The hatred for genre painting that can be discerned in Baudelaire's "Salons" is a 
sentiment typical of Jugendstil. [J85,4] 



Among the legends which circulated about Baudelaire is the following: he is sup- 
posed to have read Balzac while crossing the Ganges. In Henri Grappin, "Le 
Mysticisme poetique de Gustave Flauhert," Revue de Paris (December 1 and 15, 
1912), p. 852. [J85,5] 

"Life has only one real charm — the charm of gambling. But what if we do not care 
whether we win or lose?" Oeuvres completes, vol. 2, p. 630 ("Fusees"). 464 [ J85,6] 

"Commerce is essentially satanic. . . . Commerce is satanic because it is one of the 
forms of egoism — the lowest and vilest." Oeuvres completes, vol. 2, p. 664 ("Mon 
Coeur mis a nu"). w [J85,7] 

"What is love? The need to escape from oneself. . . .Themoreaman cultivates the 
arts, the less often he gets an erection. ... To copulate is to aspire to enter into 
another — and the artist never emerges from himself." Oeuvres completes, <vol. 2,> 
pp.655,663. 4r ' fl [J85,8] 

"It is partly a life of leisure that has enabled me to grow. To my great detriment — 
for leisure without fortune breeds dehts. . . . But also to my great profit, as re- 
gards sensibility and meditation and the faculty of dandyism and dilletantism. 
Other men of letters are, for the most part, base ignorant drudges." Oeuvres 
completes, vol. 2, p. 659 ("Mon Coeur . . ."). 4f ' 7 [J85,9] 

"As I have fully proved, to work is less wearisome than to amuse oneself." Oeuvres 
completes, vol. 2, p. 647 ("Mon Coeur . . ."). 46S [J85,10] 

On the dance of death (compare K7a,3, the passage from Huxley): "The woodcuts 
with which the Parisian printer Guyot Marchant ornamented the lirst edition of 
the Danse Macabre in 1485 were, very probably, imitated from the most cele- 
brated of these painted death dances — namely, that which, since 1424, covered the 
walls of the cloister of the cemetery of the Innocents in Paris. . . . The dancing 
person whom we see coming back forty times to lead away the living originally 
represents not Death itself but a corpse: the living man such as he will presently 
be. In the stanzas, the dancer is called "the dead man" or "the dead woman." It is 
a dance of the dead and not of Death. ... It is only toward the end of the century 
that the figure of the great dancer, of a corpse with hollow and fleshless hody, 
becomes a skeleton, as Holbein depicts it." J. Huizinga, Herbst des Mittelalters 
(Munich, 1928), pp. 204-205. 4W [J85a,l] 

On allegory. "The characters in Le Roman de la Rose — Bel-Accueil, Doulce 
Mercy, Faux Semblant, Humhle Requeste, Danger, Honte, Peur — are on a level 
with the authentic medieval representations of virtues and vices in human form: 
allegories or, something more than this, half -believed mythologems." J. Huizinga, 
Herbst des Mittelalters (Munich, 1928), p. 162. 47(1 [J85a,2] 



On "the metaphysics of the agent provocateur": "Without being too prejudiced in 
the matter, one may still feel a little uneasy in reading Les Mysteres galans [Les 
Mysteres galans des theatres de Paris]* 11 to think that Baudelaire had a hand in 
this. If he himself has disowned this piece of youthful extravagance, there are 
nonetheless good reasons for believing, with M. Crepet, that he is in fact one of the 
authors. Here then is a Baudelaire on the brink of blackmail, spiteful toward all 
success? This would suggest that throughout his career, from these Mysteres to the 
Amoenitates Belgicae, the great poet had need, from time to time, of voiding a sac 
of venom." Jean Prevost, review of the work mentioned, La Nouvelle Revue 
franqaise, 27, no. 308 (May 1, 1939), p. 888. [J85a,3] 

Apropos of Baudelaire's "Au Lecteur." "The first six books of the Confessions 
have ... a certain advantage built into their very subject: each reader, insofar as 
he is not the slave of literary or mundane prejudices, becomes an accomplice." 
Andre Monglond, he Preromantisme franqm.is, vol. 2, he Maitre des antes sensi- 
bles (Grenoble, 1930), p. 295. [J86.1] 

In an important passage by de Maistre, we not only encounter allegory in its 
satanic provenance, and in the very perspective that would later be that of Baude- 
laire; we also discover — here invested with the mysticism of Saint-Martin or 
Swedenborg — the correspondances. And these latter constitute, revealingly, the 
antidote to allegory. The passage is found in the eighth of Les Soirees de Saint- 
Petersbourg, and reads: "One can form a perfectly adequate idea of the universe 
by considering it under the aspect of a vast museum of natural history exposed to 
the shock of an earthquake. The door to the collection rooms is open and 
broken; there are no more windows. Whole drawers have fallen out, while others 
hang by their hinges, ready to drop. Some shells have rolled out into the hall of 
minerals, and a hummingbird's nest is resting on the head of a crocodile. What 
madman, though, could have any doubt of the original intention, or believe that 
the edifice was built to look this way? . . . The order is as visible as the disorder; 
and the eye that ranges over this mighty temple of nature reestablishes without 
difficulty all that a fatal agency has shattered, warped, soiled, and displaced. And 
there is more: look closely and you can recognize already the effects of a restoring 
hand. Some beams have been shored up, some paths cut through the rubble; 
and, in the general confusion, a multitude of analogues have already taken their 
place once again and come into contact." 172 [J86.2] 

On Baudelaire's prosody. A phrase has been applied to it that originally referred 
to Racine: "graze the prose, but with wings." [J86,3] 

Concerning Baudelaire's "Voyage a Cythere": 

Cythera is there, depleted and lugubrious, 
Absurd death's head of the dream of love, 
And gleaming skull of pleasure . . . 



No more bees sipping dewdrop and thyme, 
But always the blue sky above. 



Victor Hugo, Les Contemplations ("Cerigo"). [J86a,l] 

The theory of poetry as faculty of expression — "Where other men must suffer 
grief in silence, / A god gave me the power to speak my pain" 473 — is formulated 
with particular decisiveness by Lamartine in the "first" (it is actually the second) 
preface to his Meditations of 1849. The "striving for originality at all costs," to say 
nothing of an authentic reflection on original possibilities, preserves the poet — 
Baudelaire above all — from a poetics of mere expression. Lamartine writes: "I 
imitated no one; I expressed myself for myself. There was no art in this, but only 
an easing of my own heart. ... I took no thought of anyone in putting down 
these lines here and there, unless it was of a ghost and of God." Les Grands 
Ecrivains de la France, vol. 2, "Lamartine" (Paris, 1915), p. 365. [J86a,2] 

Apropos of Laforgue's remark about the "crude comparisons" in Baudelaire 
(J9,4), Ruff observes : "The originality of these comparisons is not so much in 
their 'crudity' as in the artificial character — which is to say, human character — of 
die images: wall, lid, the wings of a stage. The 'correspondence' is understood in 
a sense opposite to that customarily proposed by the poets, who lead us back to 
nature. Baudelaire, by an invincible propensity, recalls us to the idea of the 
human. Even on the human plane, if he wishes to magnify his description by an 
image, he will often look for some other manifestation of humanity rather than 
having recourse to nature: 'the chimney-pots and steeples, the city's masts."'' 17 ' 1 
Marcel A. Ruff, "Sur 1! Architecture des Fleurs du mal," Revue d'hutoire litter aire 
de la France, 37, no. 3 (July-September 1930), p. 398. Compare the phrase 
"whose fingers point to heaven," in the paragraph on Meryon <J2,1>. — The same 
motif, rendered innocuous and put into psychological terms, in Rattier's conver- 
sion of the flaneur to industrial activity. [ J86a,3] 

In Barbier's poem "Les Mineurs de Newcastle," the eighth stanza concludes this 
way: "And many a one who dreams, within his secret soul, / Of domestic comiarts, 
and his wife's hlue eyes, / Discovers in the pit's emhrace an everlasting tomb." 
Auguste Barhier, lambes etpoemes (Paris, 1841), pp. 240-241; from the collection 
Luzare, which is dated 1837, and which records his impressions of England. Com- 
pare these lines to the last two lines of "Le Crepuscule du soir." [J87, 1] 

Professional conspirator and dandy meet in the concept of the modern hero. 
This hero represents for himself, in his own person, a whole secret society. 

[J87.2] 

On the generation of Valles: "It is that generation which, under the starless sky of 
the Second Empire, grew up in the face of a . . . future without faith or greatness." 



Hermann Wendel, "Jules Valles," Die neue Zeit, 31, no. 1 (Stuttgart, 1912), 
p. 105. [J8?;3] 



"When is a courtier . . . not idle and contemplative?" La Bruyere. [ J87,4] 

Regarding "study": "Thefleshis sad, alas! and all the books are read." Mallarme, 
"Brise marine," Poesies (Paris, 1917), p. 43. 175 [J87,5] 

On idleness: "Imagine a perpetual idleness, . . . with a profound hatred of that 
idleness." <Baudelaire,> letter to his mother of Saturday, December 4, 1847. Let- 
tres m sa mere (Paris <1932>), p. 22.' t7r > [J87,6] 

Baudelaire speaks [where?] of the "habit of putting off until the next day ... so 
many important things for so many years."' 177 [J87,7] 

Early high capitalism, defined by Wiesengrund (letter of June 5, 1935) as "mod- 
ernity in the strict sense." [J87.8] 

On idleness: Baudelaire's satanism — of which so much has been made — is noth- 
ing more than his way of taking up the challenge which bourgeois society flings 
at the idle poet. This satanism is only a reasoned reprise of the cynical and 
destructive velleities — delusions, in the main — that emanate from the lower 
depths of society." 8 [J87,9] 

On idleness. "Hercules . . . labored too, . . . but the goal of his career was really 
always a sublime leisure, and for that reason he became one of the Olympians. Not 
so this Prometheus, the inventor of education and enlightenment. . . . Because he 
seduced mankind into working, [he] now has to work himself, whether he wants to 
or not. He'll have plenty of opportunity to be bored, and will never be free of his 
chains." Friedrich Schlegel, Lucinde (Leipzig), pp. 34—35 ("Idylle iiber den Miis- 
siggang" <An Idyll of Idleness)). 479 [J87a, 1] 

"And so this is what I said to myself . . . : '0 Idleness, Idleness! You are the life 
breath of innocence and inspiration. The blessed breathe you, and blessed is he 
who has you and cherishes you, you holy jewel, you sole fragment of godlikeness 
come down to us from Paradise!"' Schlegel, Lucinde p. 29 ("Idylle iiber den Miis- 
siggang")."™ [J87a,2] 

"Industry and utility are the angels of death who, with fiery swords, prevent man's 
return to Paradise. . . . And in all parts of the world, it is the right to idleness that 
distinguishes the superior from the inferior classes. It is the intrinsic principle of 
aristocracy." Schlegel, Lucinde (Leipzig), p. 32. ' m [J87a,3] 



"Baudelaire's weighty phrasing, charged as though with lluid electricity." Jules 
Renard, Journal <inedit, 1887-1895>, ed. Gallimard (Paris <I925>), p. 7. 

[J87a,4] 

"Meanwhile darkness dawns, filled with demon familiars / Who rouse, reluctant 
as businessmen, to their affairs." 182 — It may not be out of place to find here a 
reminiscence of Poe's description of the crowd. [ J87a,5] 

Just as in "A Une Passante" the crowd is neither named nor described, so the 
paraphernalia of gambling make no appearance in "Le Jeu." [J87a,6] 

In contrast to Cabet, to Fourier, and to the roving Saint-Simonian Utopians, 
Blanqui can be imagined only in Paris. Moreover, he represents himself and his 
work as belonging only in Paris. At the opposite pole is Proudhon's conception 
of great cities (Alla,2)! [J87a,7] 

Extracts from the preface which Pyat wrote for the 1884 edition of Le Chiffonnier 
de Paris <The Ragpicker of Paris>. These statements are important as indirect 
evidence of the connections that exist between Baudelaire's oeuvre and radical 
socialism. "This painful but salubrious drama . . , has merely carried through the 
logical evolution of my thinking, in advance of . . . the same evolution in the 
people. ... It is republican thinking in my first play, Une Revolution d'nutrefou <A 
Revolution of 01d>; republican-democratic in Ango, le marin <Ango, the Sailoo; 
democratic and social in Les Deux Serruriers <The Two Locksmiths), Diogenes, 
and Le Chiffbnnier; but it is always a progressivist thinking tending toward the 
ideal, toward . . . completion of the work of '89. . . . There is no doubt that 
national unity has been attained . . . and political unity as well . . . ! But social 
unity remains unachieved. There are still two classes having little in common but 
the air they breathe . . . ; nothing can unite them but mutual respect and love. 
How many wealthy French men many poor French women? The crux lies 
there. . . . Let us come back to Jean. ... I conceived this drama in prison, to 
which I had been condemned in 1844 for having avenged the republic on die 
monarchy. Yes, it is a product of imprisomnent, like those other popular protesta- 
tions Don Quixote and Robinson Crusoe; Jean has at least that in common with 
these immortal masteipieces. I conceived it the evening of the performance of its 
elder sibling Diogenes, which was produced while I was behind bars. By a very 
direct filiation of ideas, die Cynic suggested to me the Ragpicker; the lantern of 
philosophy suggested the candle of the pariah; the tub suggested the wicker 
basket; the disinterestedness of Athens suggested the zeal of Paris. Jean was the 
Diogenes of Paris, as Diogenes was the Jean of Athens. The natural inclination of 
my mind and spirit led me to the people; I am drawn to the cause of the masses. 
My poetic practice, ever in harmony with my politics, has not once separated die 
author from the citizen. Art, in my opinion, . . . — not art for art's sake, but art for 
the sake of humanity — should . . . gravitate toward the people. In fact, art follows 
what is sovereign, commencing with the gods, continuing with kings, nobles, and 



bourgeoisie, and ending with the people. And the initiative for that end, in Les 
Serniriers, had to reach its basic principle, its very center of gravity, in Le Chiffon- 
nier. For while bourgeois art . . . displayed its radiance in Hernani, Ruy Bias, and 
odier lovers of queens, . . . republican art . . . was announcing another dynasty, 
that of the ragpickers. . . . On February 24, 1848, at noon, after the victory over 
the monarchy of Louis Philippe, the drama of 'rags and tatters' was performed 
gratis before the armed and triumphant populace. It was during this memorable 
performance that the actor . . . recovered the crown in the basket. What a historic 
day! What an indescribable effect! Author, actors, director, and spectators, all 
standing together and clapping their hands to the singing of La Marseillaise, to 
the sound of cannon. ... I have spoken of the birth and the life of Jean. As for his 
death Jean was crushed, like the Republic, beneath the landslide of December. 48 ' 
The play had the honor of being condemned together with its author, who had 
seen it applauded in London, in Brussels, everywhere except Paris. Thus, in a 
society based on the family — and at a time when . . . the rights of incest, in Rene, 
the rights of adultery, in Antony, the rights of the brothel, in Rolh, all enjoyed an 
open field — Jean, representing the rights of the family, was proscribed by the 
saviors of family and society." Felix Pyat, Le Chiffbnnier de Paris, drama in five 
acts (Paris, 1884), pp. iv-viii. [J88;J88a,l] 

It would appear that Baudelaire has given no thought to the classical cor so of 
flanerie — the arcade. But in the lyric design of "Le Crepuscule du matin," which 
concludes "Tableaux parisiens," the canon of the arcade can be recognized. The 
central portion of this poem is composed of nine couplets which, while chiming 
one with another, remain well sealed off from the preceding as well as the follow- 
ing pairs of lines. The reader moves through this poem as through a gallery lined 
with showcases. In each one, the immaculate image of naked misery is on display. 
The poem closes with two quatrains that, in their presentation of things earthly 
and celestial, match each other like pilasters. [ J88a,2] 

The infernal time of gaming is something Baudelaire got to know less through 
die actual practice of gambling than through those seasons when he was prey to 
spleen. [J88a,3] 

"Paris, when seen in a ragpicker's hamper, is nothing much. ... To think that I 
have all Paris here in this wicker basket . . . !" From Pyat, Le Chiffonnier, cited in 
<Jean> Cassou, Quarante-huit (Paris <1939>), p. 13. [J88a,4] 

The Cite Dorr.e 4 " 4 was the ragpickers' metropolis. [ J88a,5] 

Portrait of Blanqui by Cassou: "Blanqui was formed to act — to act without osten- 
tation or sentimentality; he could grasp whatever was strictly real and authentic in 
the situation at hand. But the poverty, obscurity, and feebleness of the situation 
restricted his action to a series of fruitless sorties and to an acceptance of long 
imprisonment. He knew himself condemned to a purely preparatory and symbolic 



existence, to an attitude of patience with the gloom and fetters. And his whole life 
was spent in this state of mind. He became, in time, a wan and emaciated old man. 
But he will never be conquered. He cannot be conquered." Jean Cassou, Qumr- 
ante-huit (Paris), p. 24. [ J89,l] 

Concerning Hugo, but also Baudelaire's "Les Petites Vieilles" (neither men- 
tioned here by Cassou) : "For such, indeed, is the novelty of the Romantic cen- 
tury: it is the scandalous presence of the satyr at the table of the gods, the public 
manifestation of beings without name, beings without any possibility of exist- 
ence — slaves, Negroes, monsters, the spider, the nettle." Jean Cassou, Quarante- 
huit (Paris), p. 27. (One tliinks here of Marx's description of child labor in 
England.) 485 [J89,2] 

It would perhaps not be impossible to find in Baudelaire's poem "Paysage" an 
echo of '48 and of the mysticism of work characteristic of that time. And it might 
not be inappropriate to think, in this connection, of the formula coined by Cas- 
sou with reference to Jean Reynaud's Terre et del: "The ^Workshop expands all 
the way to the stars and invades eternity." Jean Cassou, Quarante-huit (Paris), 
p. 47. [J89.3] 

Fregier, Des Classes dangereuses de la population dans les grandes villes <et des 
moyens de les rendre meilleures) (Paris, 1840), vol. 2, p. 347: "The wages of the 
ragpicker, like those of the worker, are inseparable from the prosperity of indus- 
try. The latter has, like nature itself, the sublime privilege of breeding with its own 
debris. This privilege is the more precious for humanity as it propagates life within 
the lower levels of society, while making the intermediate and highest levels the 
ornament of wealth." Cited in Cassou, Quarante-huit, p. 73. [J89,4] 

"For Dante is the constant model of these men of '48. They are imbued with his 
language and his tales, and, like, him, are committed to proscription; they are 
hearers of a vagabond homeland, charged with prophetic tidings, accompanied by 
shadows and voices." Jean Cassou, Quarante-huit (Paris), p. 111. [J89a,l] 

Cassou, describing Daumier's models: "the hunched silhouettes of men in long 
shabby frock coats who are looking at engravings, and all those Baudelairean 
characters, descendants of Jean- Jacques' solitary walker." Jean Cassou, Quar- 
ante-huit (Paris), p. 149. [J89a,2] 

Regarding a connection that may be felt between Baudelaire's "generosity of 
heart" and his sadism, one should refer to Proust's portrait of Mile. Vmteuil 
(which, by the way, was probably conceived as a self -portrait) : "'Sadists' of Mile. 
Vinteuil's sort are creatures so purely sentimental, so virtuous by nature, that 
even sensual pleasure appears to them as something bad, a privilege reserved for 
the wicked. And when they allow themselves for a moment to enjoy it, they 
endeavor to impersonate, to assume all the outward appearance of wicked peo- 



pie, for themselves and their partners in guilt, so as to gain the momentary 
illusion of having escaped beyond the control of their own gentle and scrupulous 
natures into the inhuman world of pleasure." Marcel Proust, Du Cote de chez 
Swam, vol. 1, p. 236. 4,f> — One might also think here of Anatole France's note on 
the Baudelairean erotic, ^et one is justified in asking whether every sadism is 
structured like this one, since the concept of evil to which Proust relates it seems 
to exclude awareness. Sexual intercourse between human partners (in contrast to 
that between animals) includes awareness, and would thus perhaps also include a 
more or less high degree of sadism. Baudelaire's reflections on the sexual act 
would therefore carry more weight than this Proustian apologetic. [ J89a,3] 

On the subject of the ragpicker, compare the conditions in England described by 
Marx in the section "Die moderne Manufaktur," in Das Kmpital (<vol. 1,> ed. 
Korsch <Berlin, 1932>, p. 438). [ J89a,4] 

Proust on the allegories by Giotto in Santa Maria dell 1 Arena: "In later years I 
understood that the arresting strangeness ... of these frescoes lay in the great part 
played in each of them by its symbols, while the fact that these were depicted not as 
symbols (for the thought symbolized was nowhere expressed) but as real things, 
actually felt or materially handled, added something more precise and more literal 
to their meaning, something more concrete and more striking to the lesson they 
imparted. And even in the case of the poor kitchen-maid, was not our attention 
incessantly drawn to her helly by the load which filled it . . . ?" Marcel Proust, Du 
Cote de chez Sicann (Paris), vol. 1, pp. 121-122. 4117 [J90,l] 

In Baudelaire's theory of art, the motif of shock comes into play not only as 
prosodic principle. Rather, this same motif is operative wherever Baudelaire 
appropriates Poe's theory concerning the importance of surprise in the work of 
art. — From another perspective, the motif of shock emerges in the "scornful 
laughter of hell'""" which rouses the startled allegorist from his brooding. 

[J90.2] 

On information, advertisements, and feuilletons: the idler 189 must be furnished 
with sensations, the merchant with customers, and the man in the street with a 
worldview. [J90,3] 

Apropos of "Reve parisien," Crepet (<in Baudelaire, Les Fleurs du. mal, Oeuvres 
completes,> Conard edition [Paris, 1930], p. 463) cites a passage from a letter to 
Alphonse de Calonne: "Movement generally implies noise, to the extent that 
Pythagoras attributed music to the moving spheres. But dream, which separates 
things and breaks them down, creates the new." >m) Crepet further cites an article 
which Ernest Hello published in La Revue francaise of November 1858, under the 
title "Du genre fantastique" <The Genre of the Fantastic), and which Baudelaire 
would have seen. Hello writes: "In the symbolic order, beauty stands in inverse 
proportion to life. The naturalist thus classifies nature as follows: animal kingdom 



fi rst, vegetable kingdom next, mineral kingdom last. He is guided by the order of 
life. The poet will say: mineral kingdom first, vegetable kingdom after that, and 
animal kingdom last. He will be guided by the order of beauty." [ J90,4] 

Apropos of "L'Horloge," Crepet (Conard, p. 450): "A correspondent for L'lnter- 
mediaire des chercheurs et curieux <The Organ of the Inquisitive and the Curi- 
ous), M. Ch. Ad. C. (September 30, 1905), reported that Baudelaire had removed 
the hands from his clock and written on the face: 'It's later than you think!'" 

[J90a,l] 

On novelty and the familiar: "One of my dreams was the synthesis ... of a certain 
seagirt place and its medieval past. . . . This dream in which . . . the sea had 
turned gothic, this dream in which ... I believed that I was attaining to the impos- 
sible — it seemed to me that I had often dreamed it before. But as it is the property 
of what we imagine in our sleep to multiply itself in the past, and to appear, even 
when novel, familiar, I supposed that I was mistaken." Marcel Proust, La Cote de 
Guermantes (Paris, 1920), vol. 1, p. 131.* 9 ' [J90a,2] 

A rigorously Baudelairean reminiscence in Proust, to which, above all, the com- 
ments on Meryon <in "Salon de 1859"> should be compared. Proust speaks of 
railroad stations as "those vast, glass-roofed sheds, like that of Saint-Lazare into 
which I must go to find the train for Balbec, and which extended over the rent 
bowels of the city one of those bleak and boundless skies, heavy with an accumu- 
lation of dramatic menaces, like certain skies painted with an almost Parisian 
modernity by Mantegna or Veronese, beneath which could be accomplished 
only some solemn and tremendous act, such as a departure by train or the 
Elevation of the Cross." Marcel Proust, A I' Ombre des jeunes Jilles en jieurs (Paris), 
vol. 2, p. 63. 492 [J90a,3] 

The stanza beginning "If rape and arson," from "Au Lecteur," is cited by Proust 
(<La Prisonniere (Paris, 1923), vol. 2> p. 241) with this characteristic addition: 
"But I can at least assume that Baudelaire is not sincere. Whereas Dosto- 
evsky . . ."At issue is the latter's "preoccupation with murder." This all in a 
conversation with Albertine. 4M [ J90a,4] 

Apropos of "A Une Passante": "When Albertine returned to my room, she was 
wearing a garment of black satin which had the effect of making her seem paler, of 
turning her into the pallid, ardent Parisian, etiolated by want of fresh air, by the 
atmosphere of crowds and perhaps by habitual vice, whose eyes seemed more 
restless because they were not brightened by any color in her cheeks." Marcel 
Proust, La Prisonniere (Paris, 1923), vol. 1, p. 138. m [J90a,5] 

Meryon shows himself equal to the competition provided by photography. It was 
probably the last time this was possible for a graphic artist, as far as the image of 
the city is concerned. Writing about medieval Paris, Stahl says that on the site of 
the ancient curia "arose buildings that were much too large, against which the 



houses abutted with one yard after another, . . . and with blind alleys. Photogra- 
phy is useless here. Hence, we turn to the engravings of the great draftsman 
Meryon." Fritz Stahl, Paris (Berlin <1929>), p. 97. [J91,l] 



Insight into the physiognomy of "overpopulated Paris" is afforded by the back- 
ground — empty of human beings — in Meryon's Pont au change. On this back- 
ground we meet with one or two very narrow (window-wide) and, as it were, 
spindly houses. Their window openings strike the viewer like gazes; they bring 
to mind the gazes of those spindly, hollow-eyed children who appear — often 
gathered together in great numbers — in pictures of poor people from that era, 
and who stand there abashed and close-packed in a corner like the tenements in 
Meryon's engraving. [ J 9 1 ,2] 

Concerning Meryon's verses on the Pont Neuf <J2,3>, compare the old Parisian 
expression, "II se porte comme le pont neuf' ("he is hale and hearty"). [ J91.3] 

Baudelaire, great despiser of the countryside, of greenery and fields, nevertheless 
has this peculiarity: No one could be less inclined to view the big city as some- 
thing ordinary, natural, acceptable.' 195 [ J91,4] 

Baudelaire had the good fortune to be the contemporary of a bourgeoisie that 
could not yet employ, as accomplice of its domination, such an asocial type as he 
represented. The incorporation of a nihilism into its hegemonic apparatus was 
reserved for die bourgeoisie of the twentieth century. [ J 9 1 , 5 ] 

"I can understand how it is that city dwellers, who see only walls and streets and 
crimes, have so little religion." Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Les Confessions, ed. Hil- 
sum (Paris <1931>), vol. 4, p. 175.'" 6 [J91.6] 

A criterion for deciding whether or not a city is modern: the absence of monu- 
ments. "New York is a city without monuments" (Doblin) . — Meryon turned the 
tenements of Paris into monuments of modernity. [J91a,l] 

In the introduction to his published translation of one of Poe's tales in L' Illustra- 
tion (April 17, 1852), Baudelaire characterizes the American author's field of 
interests, and mentions, among other things, Poe's "analysis of the eccentrics and 
pariahs of this world" (Ch<arles> B<audelaire>, Oeuvres completes, ed. Crepet, Tra- 
ductions: Nouvelles Histoires extraordinaires [Paris, 1933], p. 378).' 197 The phrase 
corresponds, in the most striking manner, to the self-portrait which Blanqui 
introduced — as rebus image, so to speak — into L'Eternite par les astres: "Blanqui 
. . . recognized himself to be 'the pariah' of an epoch." Maurice Dommanget, 
Auguste Blanqui a Belle-Ile (Paris, 1935), pp. 140-141. [J91a,2] 

Re Meryon's Pont au change: "The hlock-tenements of Rome, such as the famous 
Insula Feliculae, rose, with a street breadth of only three to five meters, to heights 
that have never heen seen in Western Europe and are seen in only a few cities in 



America. Near the Capitol, the roofs already reached to the level of the hill-saddle. 
But always the splendid mass-cities harhor lamentahle poverty and degraded hah- 
its, and the attics and mansards, the cellars and back courts are breeding a new 
type of raw man. . . . Diodorus tells of a deposed Egyptian king who was reduced 
to living in one of these wretched upper-floor tenements of Rome." Oswald 
Spengler, Le Declin de VOccident <trans. M. Tazerout>, vol. 2 (Paris, 1933), 
p. 143. m [J91a,3] 



On the decline in the birthrate: "When the ordinary thinking of a highly cultivated 
people begins to regard 'having children' as a question of pro's and con's, the 
great turning point has come. ... At that point begins prudent limitation of the 
number of births. ... In subsequent Roman times, it became appallingly general. 
At first explained by the economic misery of the times, very soon it ceased to 
explain itself at all." Oswald Spengler, Le Declin de VOccident, vol. 2 (Paris), 
p. 147. Compare p. 146: the peasant feels himself to be a link in the chain of 
forebears and descendants. 499 [J91a,4] 



Concerning the title, Les Fleurs du mal: "During naive epochs, and as late as 1824, 
the title of a volume of poetry simply indicated the genre taken up by the author. 
There were odes, epistles, light verse, heroic verse, satires. Today, the title is a 
symhol. Nothing is more refined. When the author harbors lyric intentions, he 
gives his collection a sonorous and musical label: Melodies, Preludes . . . Tender- 
hearted friends of nature prefer to take their titles from The Good Gardener's 
Almanac. Thus, w e have Dead Leaves, . . . Branches of Almond. . . . We have 
Palms and Cypresses. . . . And then the flowers: Flowers of Noon, Flowers of 
Provence, Flowers of the Alps, Floivers of the Fields.'''' Charles Louandre, "Statis- 
tique litteraire: La Poesie depuis 1830," Revue des deux mondes, 30 (Paris, June 
15, 1842), p. 979. [J92,l] 



The original title of "Les Sept Vieillards": "Fantomes parisiens."™ 0 [J92,2] 

"From the beginning, the proclamation of Equality as a constitutional principle 
was not only an advance for thought, but a danger as well." (Max Horkheimer, 
"Materialismus und Moral," Z^hrift fur SoiUlforschung [1933], no. 2, p. 188.) r,0] 
Within the zone of this danger lie the absurd uniformities in Poe's description of 
the crowd. The hallucination of the seven identical old men is in the same mold. 

[J92.3] 



It is only as commodity that the thing has the effect of alienating human beings 
from one another. It produces this effect through its price. What is decisive is the 
empathy with the exchange value of the commodity, with its equalizing sub- 
strate. (The absolute qualitative invariance of the time in which labor that gener- 
ates exchange value runs its course — such absolute equality is the grayish 
background against which the gaudy colors of sensation stand out.) [J92,4] 



Regarding spleen. Blanqui to Lacambre, September 16, 1853: "Even the news 
from the true Empire of the Dead must he more interesting than the news from this 
dismal hall in the Kingdom of the Shades where we are being quarantined. Nothing 
more wretched than this shut-away existence, this tossing and turning at the bot- 
tom of a jar, like spiders trying to find the way out." Maurice Dommanget, Blanqui 



After a vain attempt at flight from Belle-Isle, Blanqui was thrown for a month into 
the dungeon known as "Chateau Fouquet." Dommanget refers to "the dreary and 
oppressive succession of hours and minutes that hammer the skull." Maurice 



The following lines from Barbier should be compared with parts of Baudelaire's 
poem "Paysage." Cited in Sainte-Beuve, Portraits contemporains, vol. 2 (Paris, 
1882), p. 234 ("Briseux et Auguste Barbier"). 



What inexpressible happiness, what ecstasy, 

To he a living ray of divinity; 

To look down from the orbed canopy of heaven 

On the dust of worlds glistening below, 

To hear, at every instant of their bright awakening, 

A thousand suns at their song like the birds! 

Oh, what felicity to live among things of heauty, 

And to savor the sweetness without needing reasons! 

How lovely to he well without wishing to be better, 

And without ever having to tire of the skies! [ J92a,2] 



a. Belle-Ile <Paris, 1935>, p. 250. 



[J92.5] 



Dommanget, Blanqui a. Belle-lle, p. 238. 



[J92a,l] 