[Dream City and Dream House, Dreams of the 
Future, Anthropological Nihilism, Jung] 

My good father had been in Paris. 

— Karl Gutzkow, Bnefe aus Paris (Leipzig, 1842), vol. 1, p. 58 

Library where the books have melted into one another and 
the titles have faded away. 

— Dr. Pierre Mabille, "Preface a YEloge des prejuges populaires," 
Minotaurc, 2, no. 6 (Winter 1935), p. 2 

The Pantheon raising its somber dome toward the somber 
dome of the sky. 

— Ponson du Terrail, Les Drames de Paris, vol. 1, p. 9 1 



Awakening as a graduated process that goes on in the life of the individual as in 
the life of generations. Sleep its initial stage. A generation's experience of youth 
has much in common with the experience of dreams. Its historical configuration 
is a dream configuration. Every epoch has such a side turned toward dreams, the 
child's side For the previous century, this appears very clearly in the arcades. But 
whereas the education of earlier generations explained these dreams for them in 
terms of tradition, of religious doctrine, present-day education simply amounts to 
the distraction of children. Proust could emerge as an unprecedented phenome- 
non only in a generation that had lost all bodily and natural aids to remem- 
brance 2 and that, poorer than before, was left to itself to take possession of the 
worlds of childhood in merely an isolated, scattered, and pathological way. What 
follows here is an experiment in the technique of awakening. An attempt to be- 
come aware of the dialectical — the Copernican — turn of remembrance. [Kl, 1 ] 

The Copernican revolution in historical perception is as follows. Formerly it was 
thought that a fixed point had been found in "what has been," and one saw the 
present engaged in tentatively concentrating the forces of knowledge on this 
ground. Now this relation is to be overturned, and what has been is to become 
the dialectical reversal — the flash of awakened consciousness. Politics attains 



primacy over history. The facts become something that just now first happened 
to us, first struck us; to establish them is the affair of memory. Indeed, awaken- 
ing is the great exemplar of memory: the occasion on which it is given us to 
remember what is closest, tritest, most obvious. What Proust intends with the 
experimental rearrangement of furniture in matinal half -slumber, what Bloch 
recognizes as the darkness of the lived moment, 3 is nothing other than what here 
is to be secured on the level of the historical, and collectively. There is a not-yet- 
conscious knowledge of what has been: its advancement 1 has the structure of 
awakening. [Kl,2] 

There is a wholly unique experience of dialectic. The compelling — the drastic — 
experience, which refutes everything "gradual" about becoming and shows all 
seeming "development" to be dialectical reversal, eminently and thoroughly 
composed, is the awakening from dream. For the dialectical schematism at the 
core of this process, the Chinese have often found, in their fairy tales and novel- 
las, a highly pregnant expression. The new, dialectical method of doing history 
presents itself as the art of experiencing the present as waking world, a world to 
which that dream we name the past refers in truth. To pass through and carry out 
what has been in remembering the dream! — Therefore: remembering and awak- 
ing are most intimately related. Awakening is namely the dialectical, Copernican 
turn of remembrance. [K.1,3] 

The nineteenth century a spacetime <£eitraum> (a dreamtime <2jit-traum>) in 
which the individual consciousness more and more secures itself in reflecting, 
while the collective consciousness sinks into ever deeper sleep. But just as the 
sleeper — in this respect like the madman — sets out on the macrocosmic journey 
through his own body, and the noises and feelings of his insides, such as blood 
pressure, intestinal churn, heartbeat, and muscle sensation (which for the waking 
and salubrious individual converge in a steady surge of health) generate, in the 
extravagantly heightened iimer awareness of the sleeper, illusion or dream im- 
agery which translates and accounts for them, so likewise for the dreaming col- 
lective, which, through the arcades, conmiunes with its own insides. We must fol- 
low in its wake so as to expound the nineteenth century — in fashion and advertis- 
ing, in buildings and politics — as the outcome of its dream visions. [K.1,4] 

It is one of the tacit suppositions of psychoanalysis that the clear-cut antithesis of 
sleeping and waking has no value for determining the empirical form of con- 
sciousness of the human being, but instead yields before an unending variety of 
concrete states of consciousness conditioned by every conceivable level of wake- 
fulness within all possible centers. The situation of consciousness as patterned 
and checkered by sleep and waking need only be transferred from the individual 
to the collective. Of course, much that is external to the former is internal to the 
latter: architecture, fashion — yes, even the weather — are, in the interior of the 
collective, what the sensoria of organs, the feeling of sickness or health, are inside 
the individual. And so long as they preserve this unconscious, amorphous dream 



configuration, they are as much natural processes as digestion, breathing, and the 
like. They stand in the cycle of the eternally selfsame, until the collective seizes 
upon them in politics and history emerges. [K.1,5] 



"Who will inhabit the paternal home? Who will pray in the church where he was 
baptized? Who will still know the room where he raised his first cry, where he 
witnessed a last breath? Who will be able to rest his brow above the sill of a window 
where, as a youth, he would have formed those waking dreams which are the grace 
of dawn within the long and somber servitude of life? 0 roots of joy torn from the 
human soul!' 1 Louis Veuillot, Les Odeurs de Paris (Paris, 1914), p. 11. [Kla,l] 



The fact that we were children during this time belongs together with its objec- 
tive image. It had to be this way in order to produce this generation. That is to 
say: we seek a teleological moment in the context of dreams. Which is the 
moment of waiting. The dream waits secretly for the awakening; the sleeper 
surrenders himself to death only provisionally, waits for the second when he will 
cunningly wrest himself from its clutches. So, too, the dreaming collective, whose 
children provide the happy occasion for its own awakening. D Method D 

[Kla,2] 



Task of childhood: to bring the new world into symbolic space. The child, in fact, 
can do what the grownup absolutely cannot: recognize the new once again. For 
us, locomotives already have symbolic character because we met with them in 
childhood. Our children, however, will find this in automobiles, of which we 
ourselves see only the new, elegant, modern, cheeky side. There is no more 
insipid and shabby antithesis than that which reactionary thinkers like Klages try 
to set up between the symbol-space of nature and that of technology. To each 
truly new configuration of nature — and, at bottom, technology is just such a 
configuration — there correspond new "images." Every childhood discovers these 
new images in order to incorporate them into the image stock of humanity. 
D Method D [Kla,3] 



It is remarkable that constructions in which the expert recognizes anticipations of 
contemporary building fashions impress the alert but architecturally unschooled 
sense not at all as anticipatory but as distinctly old-fashioned and dreamlike. (Old 
railroad stations, gasworks, bridges.) [Kla,4] 



"The nineteenth century, singular fusion of individualistic and collectivist tenden- 
cies. Unlike virtually every previous age, it labels all actions 'individualistic' (ego, 
nation, art) while subterraneanly, in despised everyday domains, it necessarily 
furnishes, as in a delirium, the elements for a collective formation. . . . With this 
raw material, we must occupy ourselves — with gray buildings, market halls, de- 
partment stores, exhibitions." Sigfried Giedion, Bauen in Frankreich (Leipzig 
and Berlin), p. 15. [Kla,5] 



It is not only that the forms of appearance taken by the dream collective in the §■> 
nineteenth century cannot be thought away, and not only that these forms char- 

acterize this collective much more decisively than any other — they are also, j, 

rightly interpreted, of the highest practical import, for they allow us to recognize q 

the sea on which we navigate and the shore from which we push off. It is here, p 

therefore, that the "critique" of the nineteenth century — to say it in one word— ^ 

ought to begin. Hie critique not of its mechanism and cult of machinery but of its J? 

narcotic historicism, its passion for masks, in which nevertheless lurks a signal of g 
true historical existence, one which the Surrealists were the first to pick up. To 

decipher this signal is the concern of the present undertaking. And the revolu- | 

tionary materialist basis of Surrealism is sufficient warrant for the fact that, in this . 

signal of true historical existence, the nineteenth century gave supreme expres- o 

sion to its economic basis. [Kla,6] j? 

Attempt to develop Giedion's thesis. "In the nineteenth century," he writes, | 

"construction plays the role of the subconscious." 5 Wouldn't it be better to say 0 

"the role of bodily processes" — around which "artistic" architectures gather, like fj. 

dreams around the framework of physiological processes? [Kla,7] gj 

Capitalism was a natural phenomenon with which a new dream-filled sleep came . 
over Europe, and, through it, a reactivation of mythic forces. [Kla,8] '. 

J 

The fir st tremors of awakening serve to deepen sleep. [Kla,9] 

"Strange, by the way, that when we survey this whole intellectual movement, 
Scribe appears as the only one to occupy himself directly and thoroughly with the 
present. Everyone else busies himself more with the past than with the powers and 
interests that set their own time in motion. ... It was the past, moreover — it was 
the history of philosophy — that fueled eclectic doctrine; and, finally, it was the 
history of literature whose treasures were disclosed, in Villemain, by a criticism 
incapable of entering more deeply into the literary life of its own period." Julius 
Meyer, Geschichte tier modernen franzdsischen Malerei. (Leipzig, 1867), pp. 415- 
416. [K2,l] 

What the child (and, through faint reminiscence, the man) discovers in the pleats 
of the old material to which it clings while trailing at its mother's skirts — that's 
what these pages should contain. D Fashion D [K2,2] 

It is said that the dialectical method consists in doing justice each time to the 
concrete historical situation of its object. But that is not enough. For it is just as 
much a matter of doing justice to the concrete historical situation of the interest 
taken in the object. And this situation is always so constituted that the interest is 
itself preformed in that object and, above all, feels this object concretized in itself 
and upraised from its former being into the higher concretion of now-being 
<Jetztsein> (waking being!). In what way this now-being (which is something other 



than the now-being of "the present time" <Jetztzeit>, since it is a being punctuated 
and intermittent) already signifies, in itself, a higher concretion — this question, of 
course, can be entertained by the dialectical method only within the purview of a 
historical perception that at all points has overcome the ideology of progress. In 
regard to such a perception, one could speak of the increasing concentration 
(integration) of reality, such that everything past (in its time) can acquire a higher 
grade of actuality than it had in the moment of its existing. How it marks itself as 
higher actuality is determined by the image as which and in which it is compre- 
hended. And this dialectical penetration and actualization of former contexts 
puts the truth of all present action to the test. Or rather, it serves to ignite the 
explosive materials that are latent in what has been (the authentic figure of which 
is Jkshion) . To approach, in this way, "what has been" means to treat it not histo- 
riographically, as heretofore, but politically, in political categories. D Fashion □ 

[K2,3] 

Ihe imminent awakening is poised, like the wooden horse of the Greeks, in the 
Troy of dreams. [K2,4] 

On the doctrine of the ideological superstructure. It seems, at first sight, that 
Marx wanted to establish here only a causal relation between superstructure and 
infrastructure. But already the observation that ideologies of the superstructure 
reflect conditions falsely and invidiously goes beyond this. The question, in 
effect, is the following: if the infrastructure in a certain way (in the materials of 
thought and experience) determines the superstructure, but if such determina- 
tion is not reducible to simple reflection, how is it then — entirely apart from any 
question about the originating cause — to be characterized? As its expression. The 
superstructure is the expression of the infrastructure. The economic conditions 
under which society exists are expressed in the superstructure — precisely as, with 
the sleeper, an overfiill stomach finds not its reflection but its expression in the 
contents of dreams, which, from a causal point of view, it may be said to "condi- 
tion." The collective, from the first, expresses the conditions of its life. These find 
their expression in the dream and their interpretation in the awakening. [K2,5] 

Jugendstil — a first attempt to reckon with the open air. It finds a distinctive 
embodiment, for example, in the drawings of Simplicissimus, which clearly show 
how, in order to get a little air, one must become satirical. From another per- 
spective, Jugendstil could blossom in the artificial light and isolation in which 
advertising presents its objects. This birth of plein air from the spirit of the 
interior is the sensuous expression of the situation of Jugendstil from the view- 
point of the philosophy of history: Jugendstil is the dream that one has come 
awake. <See S4a,L> D Advertising D [K2,6] 

Just as technology is always revealing nature from a new perspective, so also, as it 
impinges on human beings, it constantly makes for variations in their most 



primordial passions, fears, and images of longing. In this work I mean to wrest 
from primal history <Urgeschichte> a portion of the nineteenth century. The 
alluring and threatening face of primal history is clearly manifest to us in the 
beginnings of technology, in the living arrangements of the nineteenth century; it 
has not yet shown itself in what lies nearer to us in time But it is also more 
intense in technology (on account of the latter's natural origin) than in other 
domains. That is the reason old photographs — but not old drawings — have a 
ghosdy effect. [K2a,l] 

On Wiertz's picture Thoughts and Vinous of a Severed Head, and its explicadon. 
The first thing that strikes one about this magnetopathic experience is the grandi- 
ose sleight of hand which the consciousness executes in death. "What a singular 
thing! The head is here under the scaffold, and it believes that it still exists above, 
forming part of the body and continuing to wait for the blow that will separate it 
from the trunk." A. Wiertz, Oeuvres litteraires (Paris, 1870), p. 492. The same 
inspiration at work here in Wiertz animates Bierce in his extraordinary short 
story about the rebel who is hanged, and who experiences, at the moment of his 
death, the flight that frees him from the hangman. 6 [K2a,2] 

Every current of fashion or of worldview derives its force from what is forgotten. 
This downstream flow is ordinarily so strong that only the group can give itself 
up to it; the individual — the precursor — is liable to collapse in the face of such 
violence, as happened with Proust. In other words: what Proust, as an individual, 
directly experienced in the phenomenon of remembrance, we have to experience 
indirectly (with regard to the nineteenth century) in studying "current," "fash- 
ion," "tendency" — as punishment, if you will, for the sluggishness which keeps 
us from taking it up ourselves. 7 [K2a,3] 

Fashion, like architecture, inheres in the darkness of the lived moment, belongs 
to the dream consciousness of the collective. The latter awakes, for example, in 
advertising. [K2a,4] 

"Very interesting . . . how the fascistization of science had to alter precisely those 
elements in Freud which still stem from the enlightened, materialistic period ol the 
bourgeoisie. ... In Jung, . . . the unconscious ... is no longer individual — that is, 
not an acquired condition in the single . . . human being, but a stock of primal 
humanity renewing itself in the present; it is not repression hut fruitful return." 
Ernst Bloch, Erbschaft dieser Zeit (Zurich, 1935), p. 254." [K2a,5] 

Historical index of childhood according to Marx. In his derivation of the norma- 
tive character of Greek art (as an art springing from the childhood of the human 
race), Marx says: "Doesn't the child in every epoch represent the character of the 
period in its natural veracity?" 9 Cited in Max Raphael, Proudhon, Marx, Picasso 
(Paris, 1933), p. 175. [K2a,6] 



More than a hundred years before it was fully manifest, the colossal acceleration 
of the tempo of living was heralded in the tempo of production. And, indeed, in 
the form of the machine. "The number of implements that he himself [that is, the 
human being] can use simultaneously is limited by the number of his own natural 
instruments of production, by the number of his bodily organs. . . . The jenny, on 
the other hand, even at its very birth, spun with twelve to eighteen spindles, and 
the stocking loom knits with many thousands of needles at once. The number of 
tools that a machine can bring into play simultaneously is, from the very first, 
emancipated from the organic limits that hedge in the tools of a handicraftsman." 
Karl Marx, Das Kapital, vol. 1 (Hamburg, 1922), p. 337.'°The tempo of machine 
operation effects changes in the economic tempo. "In this country, the main thing 
is to reap a huge fortune with as little delay as possible. It used to be that the 
fortune resulting from a commercial house begun by the grandfather was 
scarcely run through by the time the grandson died. Things don't happen that 
way any more; people want to enjoy without waiting, without having to be 
patient." Louis Rainier Lanfranchi, Voyage a Paris, ou Esquisses des homines et des 
choses dans cette capitale (Paris, 1830), p. 110. [K3,l] 

Simultaneity, the basis of the new style of living, likewise comes from mechanical 
production: "Each detail machine supplies raw material to the machine next in 
order; and since they are all working at the same time, the product is always 
going through the various stages of its fabrication, and is also constantly in a state 
of transition from one phase to another. . . . The collective machine, now an 
organized system of various kinds of single machines, and of groups of single 
machines, becomes more and more perfect, the more the process as a whole 
becomes a continuous one — that is, the less the raw material is interrupted in its 
passage from its first phase to its last; in other words, the more its passage from 
one phase to another is effected not by the hand of man but by the machinery 
itself. In manufacture the isolation of each detail process is a condition imposed 
by the nature of division of labor, but in the fully developed factory the continu- 
ity of those processes is, on the contrary, imperative." Karl Marx, Das Kapital, 
vol. 1 (Hamburg, 1922), p. 344." [K3,2] 

Film: unfolding <result?> 12 of all the forms of perception, the tempos and rhythms, 
which lie preformed in today's machines, such that all problems of contemporary 
art find their definitive formulation only in the context of film. □ Precursors D 

[K3.3] 

A small piece of materialist analysis, more valuable than most of what exists in 
this field: "Wfe love these hard, solid blocks of material which Flaubert raises and 
lets fall with the intermittent thud of a steam shovel. For if, as I found recounted 
in some book or other, sailors at sea used to catch the glow of Flaubert's lamp as 
he worked through the night, and take their bearings from it, as if from a light- 
house beam, so too it might be said that when he 'unloaded' a good round 
phrase, it had the regular rhythm of one of those machines used in excavating. 



Happy are they who can feel the beat of this obsessive rhythm." Marcel Proust, 
Chroniques (Paris, 1927), p. 204 ("A Propos du 'style' de Flaubert"). 13 [K3.4] 

In his chapter on the fetish character of the commodity, Marx has shown how 
ambiguous the economic world of capitalism seems. It is an ambiguity consider- 
ably heightened by the intensification of capital management — as we see exem- 
plified quite clearly in the machines which aggravate exploitation rather than 
alleviate the human lot. Isn't there implicit here a general connection to the 
equivocalness of the phenomena we are dealing with in the nineteenth century? 
The significance of intoxication for perception, of fiction for thinking, such as 
was never before recognized? "One thing has disappeared in the general up- 
heaval, and it was a great loss for art: the naive and therefore dependable accord 
of life and appearance" — so we read, characteristically, in Julius Meyer's Geschichte 
der modernen franzosischen Malerei seit 1789 (Leipzig, 1867), p. 31. [K3,5] 

On the political significance of film. Socialism would never have entered the 
world if its proponents had sought only to excite the enthusiasm of the working 
classes for a better order of things. "What made for the power and authority of the 
movement was that Marx understood how to interest the workers in a social 
order which would both benefit them and appear to them as just. It is exactly the 
same with art. At no point in time, no matter how Utopian, will anyone win the 
masses over to a higher art; they can be won over only to one nearer to them. 
And the difficulty consists precisely in finding a form for art such that, with the 
best conscience in the world, one could hold that it is a higher art. This will never 
happen with most of what is propagated by the avant-garde of the bourgeoisie. 
Here, Berl's argument is perfectly correct: "The confusion over the word 'revolu- 
tion' — a word which, for a Leninist, signifies the acquisition of power by the 
proletariat, and which elsewhere signifies the overturning of recognized spiritual 
values — is sufficiently attested by the Surrealists in their desire to establish Pi- 
casso as a revolutionary. . . . Picasso deceives them. ... A painter is not more 
revolutionary for having 'revolutionized' painting than a tailor like Poiret is for 
having 'revolutionized' fashion, or than a doctor is for having 'revolutionized' 
medicine." Emmanuel Berl, "Premier pamphlet," Europe, 75 (1929), p. 401. The 
masses positively require from the work of art (which, for them, has its place in 
the circle of consumer items) something that is warming. Here the flame most 
readily kindled is that of hatred. Its heat, however, burns or sears without provid- 
ing the "heart's ease" which qualifies art for consumption. Kitsch, on the other 
hand, is nothing more than art with a 100 percent, absolute and instantaneous 
availability for consumption. Precisely within the consecrated forms of expres- 
sion, therefore, kitsch and art stand irreconcilably opposed. But for developing, 
living forms, what matters is that they have within them something stirring, 
useful, ultimately heartening — that they take "kitsch" dialecticaJly up into them- 
selves, and hence bring themselves near to the masses while yet surmounting the 
kitsch. Today, perhaps, film alone is equal to this task — or, at any rate, more ready 
for it than any other art form. And whoever has recognized this will be inclined 



to disallow the pretentions of abstract film, as important as its experiments may 
be. He will call for a closed season on — a natural preserve for — the sort of kitsch 
whose providential site is the cinema. Only film can detonate the explosive stuff 
which the nineteenth century has accumulated in that strange and perhaps for- 
merly unknown material which is kitsch. But just as with the political structure of 
film, so also with other distinctively modern means of expression (such as light- 
ing or plastic design) : abstraction can be dangerous. [K3a, 1] 

One can characterize the problem of the form of the new art straight on: When 
and how will the worlds of form which, without our assistance, have arisen, for 
example, in mechanics, in film, in machine construction, in the new physics, and 
which have subjugated us, make it clear for us what mariner of nature they 
contain? When will we reach a state of society in which these forms, or those 
arising from them, reveal themselves to us as natural forms? Of course, this 
brings to light only one moment in the dialectical essence of technology. ( Which 
moment, is hard to say: antithesis if not synthesis.) In any case, there lives in 
technology another impulse as well: to bring about objectives strange to nature, 
along with means that are alien and inimical to nature — measures that emanci- 
pate themselves from nature and master it. [K3a,2] 

On Grandville: "Between an uninformed vision of the streets and a knowledge of 
the occult derived from cartomancy or astrology, a knowledge openly tormented 
hy flora and fauna and by a dream-humanity, he managed to lead a boundless 
imaginary life within a fabulous realm of primal poetry. . . . Grandville was per- 
haps the first draftsman ever to give the larval life of dreams a rational plastic 
form. Evident beneath this poised appearance, however, is that flebile nescio 
quid 1 ' 1 which disconcerts and provokes disquietude — sometimes troubling 
enough." MacOrlan, "Grandville le precurseur," Arts et metiers graphiques, 44 
(December 15, 1934.), pp. 20-21. The essay presents <Grandville> as a forerunner 
of Surrealism, particularly of surrealist film (Melies, Walt Disney). [K.4,1] 

Confrontation hetween the "visceral unconscious" and the "unconscious of obliv- 
ion" — the first of which is predominantly individual, the second predominantly 
collective: "The other part of the unconscious is made up of the mass of things 
learned in the course of the centuries and in the course of a life, things which were 
conscious once and which, by diffusion, have entered oblivion. . . . Vast subma- 
rine fund, in which all cultures, all studies, all proceedings of mind and will, all 
social uprisings, all struggles are collected in a formless mire. . . . The passional 
elements of individuals have receded, dimmed. All that remain are the givens of 
the external world, more or less transformed and digested. It is of the external 
world that this unconscious is made. . . . Born of social life, this humus belongs to 
societies . The species and the individual count for little in it; only the races and the 
ages leave their mark. This enormous labor undertaken in the shadows comes to 
light in dreams, thoughts, decisions, and above all at moments of crisis or of social 
upheaval; it forms the great common ground, the reserve of peoples and individu- 



als. Revolution and war, like a fever, are hest suited to get it moving. . . . Seeing 
that the psychology of the individual is now outmoded, let us call upon a sort of 
natural history of volcanic rhythms and suhterranean streams. There is nothing 
on the surface of the earth that was not once suhterranean (water, earth, fire). 
Nothing in the intellect that has not been digested and circulated in the depths." 
Dr. Pierre Mabille, "Preface a VEloge des prejuges populaires" Minotaure, 2, 
no. 6 (Winter 1935), p. 2. [K4,2] 

"The recent past always presents itself as though annihilated by catastrophes." 
Wiesengrund, in a letter <of June 5, 1935>. 15 [K4,3] 

Apropos of Henry Bordeaux's recollections of his youth: "In sum, the nineteenth 
century ran its course without in the least appearing to announce the twentieth." 
Andre Therive, "Les Livres," Le Temps (June 27, 1935). [K4,4] 

The embers blaze in your eyes, 
And you flash like a mirror. 
Have you hooves, have you wings, 
My black-flanked locomotive? 
See its mane ripple, 
Listen to that whinny; 
Its gallop is a rumble 
Of artillery and thunder. 

Refrain: 

Feed your horse its oats! 

Saddled, bridled — whistle and we're off! Ride 
At a gallop across the bridge, under the arch, 
Plow your way through hill and dale — 
No mount can rival yours. 

Pierre Dupont, "Le Chauffeur de locomotive" (Paris) ("Passage du Caire"). 

[K4 a ,l] 

"Yesterday, looking down from the tower of Notre Dame, I was aide to take in this 
gigantic city. Who huilt the first house, and when will the last one collapse? When 
will the ground of Paris look like that of Thebes or Bahylon?" Friedrich von 
Raumer, Brief e aits Paris und Frankreich im Jahre 1830 (Leipzig, 1831), vol. 2, 
p. 127. [K4 a ,2] 

D'Eichthal's additions to Duveyrier's plan of the "new city." They have to do with 
the temple. Significant that Duveyrier himself says, "My temple is a woman!" 
Counters d'Eichthal: "I think that the temple will contain the palace of man and 
the palace of woman; the man will go to pass the night with the woman, and the 
woman will come to work during the day with the man. Between the two palaces 
will be the temple proper, the place of communion, where the man and the woman 
join with all women and all men; and there the couple will neither rest nor lahor in 



isolation. . . . The temple ought to represent an androgyne, a man and a 
woman. . . . The same method of division should be employed throughout the city, 
throughout the realm, throughout the world: there will he the hemisphere of man 
and the hemisphere of woman." Henry-Rene d'Allemagne, Les Saint-Simoniens , 
1827-1837 (Paris, 1930), p. 310. [K4a,3] 

The Paris of the Saint-Simonians. From the draft plan sent hy Charles Duveyrier 
to L'Advocmt, with the expectation of having it incorporated into Le Livre des 
cent-et-iui (which, evidently, it was not): "We wanted to give a human form to the 
lirst city inspired by our faith." "The Lord, in his goodness, has spoken through 
the mouth of man: he sends . . . Paris! It is on the banks of your river and within 
your walls that I shall impress the seal of my new bounty. . . . Your kings and your 
peoples have marched with the slowness of centuries, and they have finally arrived 
at a magnificent place. It is there that the head of my city will repose. . . . The 
palaces of your kings will be its brow, . . . and I shall tend to its heard of mighty 
chestnut trees. . . . From the top of that head I will sweep away the old Christian 
temple, . . . and in this clearing I will arrange a headdress of trees. . . . Above the 
hreast of my city, in that sympathetic foyer where the passions all diverge and 
come together, where sorrows and joys vibrate, I will huild my temple, . . . solar 
plexus of the giant. . . . The hills of Roule and Chaillot will form its Hanks; there I 
will estahlish hank and university, marketplaces and publishing houses. ... I will 
extend the left arm of the colossus along the bank of the Seine; it will run . . . 
opposite . . . Passy. The corps of engineers . . . will constitute the upper portion, 
which will stretch toward Vaugirard, and I will make the forearm from the union 
of all the specialized schools of physical science. ... In hetween, ... I will assem- 
hie all the grammar schools and high schools for my city to press to its hreast, there 
on the left where the university is lodged. I will extend the right arm of the giant, as 
a show of force, all the way to the Gare de Saint-Ouen. ... I will load this arm with 
workshops of small industry, arcades, galleries, bazaars. ... I will form the right 
thigh and leg from all the large manufacturing establishments. The right foot will 
touch Neuilly. The left thigh will offer foreigners a long row of hotels. The left leg 
will reach to the Bois de Boulogne. . . . My city is in the posture of a man ahout to 
set off. His feet are hronze; they are resting on a double road of stone and iron. 
Here . . . vehicles of transport and instruments of communication are manufac- 
tured; here carriages race ahout. . . . Between its knees is an equestrian arena; 
hetween its legs, an immense hippodrome." Henry-Rene d'Allemagne, Les Saint- 
Simoniens, 1827-1837 (Paris, 1930), pp. 309-310. The idea for this proposal goes 
hack to Enfantin, who developed plans for the city of the future with the aid of 
anatomical charts. [K5] 

But no, the Orient summons you 
To go irrigate its deserts; 
Raise high into the air 
The towers of the ville ntuvelle. 



F. Maynard, "L'Avenir est beau," in Foi nouvelle: Chants et chansons de Bar- 
rault, Vinqard . . . , 1831 d 1834 (Paris, January 1, 1835), hook 1, p. 81. Regard- 
ing the motif of the desert, compare Rouget de Lisle's "Chant des industriels" and 
"Le Desert" by Felicien David. [K5a,l] 

Paris in the year 2855: "The city is 75 miles in circumference. Versailles and 
Fontainebleau — neighborhoods lost among so many others — send into less tran- 
quil boroughs refreshing perfumes from trees that are twenty centuries old. 
Sevres, which has become the regular market for the Chinese (French citizens 
since the war of 2850), displays ... its pagodas with their echoing little bells; in its 
midst can still he found the factories of an earlier age, reconstructed in porcelain d 
la rei/ie." Arsene Houssaye, "Le Paris futur," in Paris et les Parisiens au XIX- 
siecle (Paris, 1856), p. 459. [K5a,2] 

Chateaubriand on the Obelisk de la Concorde: "The hour will come when the 
obelisk of the desert will find once again, on Murderers' Square, the silence and 
solitude of Luxor." 16 Cited in Louis Bertrand, "Discours sur Chateaubriand," Le 
Temps (September 18, 1935). [K5a,3] 

Saint-Simon once proposed "turning a mountain in Switzerland into a statue of 
Napoleon. In one hand, it would hold an occupied city; in the other, a lake. " Count 
Gustav von Schlabrendorf, in Paris, on events and persons of his day [in Carl 
Gustav Jochmann, Reliquien: Aus seinen nachgelassenen Papieren, ed. Heinrich 
Zschokke, vol. 1 (Hechingen, 1836), p. 146]. [K5a,4] 

Nocturnal Paris in L'Homme qui rit: "The little wanderer was suffering the in- 
definable depression made by a sleeping town. Its silence, as of a paralyzed ants' 
nest, makes the head swim. All its lethargies mingle their nightmares, its slumbers 
are a crowd." 17 Cited in R. Caillois, "Paris, mythe moderne," Nouvelle Revue 
franqaise, 25, no. 284 (May 1, 1937), p. 691. [K5a,5] 

"Because the collective unconscious is ... a deposit of world-processes embedded 
in the structure of the brain and the sympathetic nervous system, it constitutes . . . 
a sort of timeless and eternal world-image which counterbalances our conscious, 
momentary picture of the world." C. G. Jung, Seelenprobleme der Gegemvart 
(Zurich, Leipzig, and Stuttgart, 1932), p. 326 ("Analytische Psychologie und Welt- 
anschauung"). 1 " [K6,l] 

Jung calls the consciousness — on occasion! — "our Promethean conquest." C. G. 
Jung, Seelenprobleme der Gegemvart (Zurich, Leipzig, and Stuttgart, 1932), 
p. 249 ("Die Lehenswende"). And in another context: "To be 'unhistorical' is the 
Promethean sin. In this sense, modern man lives in sin. Higher consciousness is 
thus guilt." Ihid., p. 404 ("Das Seelenproblem des modernen Menschen").' 9 

[K6.2] 



"There can be no doubt that from . . . the memorable years of the French Revo- 
lution onward, man has given a more and more prominent place to the psyche, 
his increasing attentiveness to it being the measure of its growing attraction for 
him. The enthronement of the Goddess of Reason in Notre Dame seems to have 
been a symbolic gesture of great significance to the Western world — rather like 
the hewing down of Wotan's oak by the Christian missionaries. For then, as at 
the Revolution, no avenging bolt from heaven struck the blasphemer down." 
G. G.Jung, Seelenprobleme der Gegenwart (Zurich, Leipzig, and Stuttgart, 1932), 
p. 419 ("Das Seelenproblem des modernen Menschen"). 2 ' The "vengeance" for 
these two historical points of departure is being exacted today, it would seem, 
simultaneously. National Socialism takes the one affair in hand; Jung, the other. 

[K6.3] 

As long as there is still one beggar around, there will still be myth. [K6,4] 

"Moreover, an ingenious improvement had been introduced into the construction 
of squares. The administration bought them prefabricated, made to order. Trees 
of colored cardboard and taffeta flowers contributed greatly to these oases, and 
care had even been taken to conceal in the leaves some artificial birds that sang the 
whole day long. Thus, what is pleasant in nature had been preserved, while every- 
thing unfit and unworthy in nature had been eliminated." Victor Fournel, Paris 
nouveau et Paris futur (Paris, 1868), p. 252 ("Paris futur"). [K6,5] 

"The works of M. Haussmann gave rise, at least in the beginning, to a host of 
rather strange or grandiose projects. . . . For example, the architect M. Herard 
published, in 1855, a proposal for building footbridges at the intersection of the 
Boulevard Saint-Denis and the Boulevard de Sebastopol; these footbridges, incor- 
porating galleries, would make for a continuous square, each side of which would 
be defined by the angfe formed at the crossing of the two boufevards. M. J. Brame, 
in 1856, exhibited a series of lithographs detailing bis plan for a metropolitan 
railway line — in Paris, specificaffy — with a system of arches supporting the rails, 
with wafkways on the side for pedestrians, and with elevated crossovers to connect 
these sidewafks. ... At around the same time, in a "Letter to the Minister of 
Commerce," a lawyer calfed for the estabfishment of a series of awnings running 
the length of the streets to shefter the pedestrian, . . . who would have no further 
need of a carriage or umbrella. Not long after this, an architect . . . proposed to 
reconstruct the entire historic city center in Gothic style, so as to bring it into 
harmony with Notre Dame." Victor Fournel, Paris nouveau et Paris futur (Paris, 
1868), pp. 384-386. [K6a,l] 

From Fournel's chapter "Paris futur": "There were first-, second-, and third- 
cfass cafes, . . . and, for each category, the number of rooms, tables, billiard ta- 
bles, mirrors, ornaments, and gildings was carefully regulated. . . . There were 
master streets and service streets, just as there are master stairways and service 



stairways in well-organized houses. . . . On the facade of the har racks, a has-relief 
. . . depicted, in an ethereal nimbus, Puhlic Order dressed as an infantryman: an 
aureole ahove his brow, he was busy laying low the hundred-headed Hydra of 
Decentralization. . . . Fifty sentinels, posted at the fifty windows of the barracks 
opposite the fifty boulevards, were ahle to see, through field glasses, at a distance 
of fifteen or twenty kilometers, the fifty sentinels at the fifty gates. . . . Crowning 
Montmartre was a dome decorated with a giant electric clock, which could he 
viewed from two sides and heard from four, and which served to regulate all the 
clocks in the city. The great goal so long sought had finally been achieved: that of 
making Paris an ohject of luxury and curiosity, rather than of use — a ville d" expo- 
sition, a display city placed under glass, ... an ohject of admiration and envy to 
foreigners, unhearahle for its inhabitants. "V. Fournel, pp. 235-237, 240-241. 

[K6a,2] 

Critique by Fournel of Ch. Duveyrier's Saint-Simonian city: "We cannot continue 
with the exposition of this rash metaphor of M. Duveyrier's, which he develops . . . 
with a truly stupefying single-mindedness, and without any sense of the way in 
which his ingenious distribution would return the city of Paris, in the name of 
progress, to that period of the Middle Ages when each hranch of industry or trade 
was confined to its own quartier.'''' Victor Fournel, Paris nouveau et Paris futur 
(Paris, 1868), pp. 374-375 ("Les Precurseuis de M. Haussmann"). [K7,l] 

"We shall speak of a monument especially dear to our heart, one which has come to 
seem, with a climate such as ours, a virtual necessity: . . . the winter garden 1 . . . . 
Near the center of the city, a vast piece of ground capable of holding, like the 
Colosseum in Rome, a large part of the population, would be enclosed by a great 
lighted vault, a little like the Crystal Palace in London, or like our market halls of 
today; the columns would he of cast iron, with only a hit of stone to strengthen the 
foundations. ... 0, my winter garden, what use I would make of you for my 
Novutopians! In the great city of Paris, hy contrast, they have built a heavy, 
clumsy, ugly monument of stone, which no one knows what to do with. Here, in 
recent months, the paintings of our artists have heen displayed, facing away from 
the light, baking at only a slightly greater remove from the blazing sun." F. A. 
Couturier de Vienne, Paris moderne: Plan d'une ville modele que Vautew a ap- 
pelee Novutopie (Paris, 1860), pp. 263-265. [K7,2] 

On the dream house: "In all southern countries, where the popular conception of 
the street requires that the exteriors of houses appear more 'lived in' than their 
interiors, this exhihition of the private life of the residents confers on their dwell- 
ings the quality of a secret place, which piques the curiosity of foreigners. The 
impression made is the same in fairs: everything there is consigned to the street 
with such abandon that whatever is not there takes on the power of a mystery." 
Adrien Dupassage, "Peintures foraines," Arts et metiers graphiques (1939). 

[K7,3] 



Couldn't one compare the social differentiation present in architecture (see 
FournePs description of cafes in K6a,2; or front stairs versus back stairs) with the 
social differentiation at work in fashion? [K7a,l] 



On anthropological nihilism, compare N8a,l : Celine, Benn. [K7a,2] 

"The fifteenth century . . . was a time when corpses, skulls and skeletons were 
extravagantly popular. Painted, sculpted, written about and dramatically repre- 
sented, the Danse Macabre was everywhere. To the fifteenth-century artist, a good 
death-appeal was as sure a key to popularity as a good sex-appeal is at the present 
time." Aldous Huxley, Croisiere d'hiver: <Voyage> en Amerique centrale (Paris 
<1935>), p. 58. 21 [K7a,3] 

Concerning the interior of the body: "The motif and its elaboration go back to 
John Chrysostom's 'On Women and Beauty' (Opera, ed. B. de Montfaucon 
[Paris, 1735], vol. 12, p. 523). ,1 "The beauty of the body is merely skin-deep. For 
if, like the legendary lynx of Boeotia, men were to see what lies beneath the skin, 
they would recoil in disgust at the sight of a woman. That well-known charm is 
nothing but mucus and blood, humors and bile. Just stop to consider what is 
hidden away in the nostrils, the throat, or the belly: everywhere filth. And if, in 
fact, we shrink from touching mucus or dung with even the tip of our finger, how 
could we ever wish to embrace the sack of excrements itself?" Odon of Cluny, 
Collationum, hook 3 (Migne), vol. 133, p. 556; cited in J. Huizinga, Herbst des 
Mittelalters (Munich, 1928), p. 197. 22 [K7a,4] 

Re the psychoanalytic theory of memory: "Freud's later researches made it clear 
that this view [the concept of repression] must he enlarged. . . . The macliinery of 
repression ... is ... a special case of the . . . significant process which occurs 
when the ego is unequal to meeting certain demands made upon the mental mecha- 
nism. The more general process of defense does not cancel the strong impressions; 
it only lays them aside. ... It will he in the interest of clarity for me to state the 
contrast between memory and reminiscence with deliberate bluntness: the func- 
tion of memory [the author identifies the sphere of "forgetfulness" with "uncon- 
scious memory" (p. 130)] is to protect our impressions; reminiscence aims at their 
dissolution. Essentially memory is conservative; reminiscence, destructive. " 
Theodor Reik, Der iiberraschte Psychologe (Leiden, 1935), pp. 130-132. 23 

[K8.1] 

"For instance, we experience the death of a near relative . . . and believe that we 
feel our grief in all its depth . . . , but our grief reveals its depths only long after we 
think that we have got the better of it." The "forgotten" grief persists and gains 
ground; compare the death of the grandmother in Proust. "To experience means 
to master an impression inwardly that was so strong we could not grasp it at 
once." This definition of experience in Freud's sense is something very different 



from what is meant by those who speak of having "had an experience." Theodor o 
Reik, Der iiberraschte Psyc/wloge (Leiden, 1935), p. 131. 24 [K8,2] 

T- 

What is laid aside in the unconscious as content of memory. Proust speaks of the q 

"thoroughly alive and creative sleep of the unconscious ... in which the things | 

that barely touch us succeed in carving an impression, in which our hands take " 

hold of the key that turns the lock, the key for which we have sought in vain." ft" 

Marcel Proust, La Prisonniere (Paris, 1923), vol. 2, p. 189. 25 [K8,3] g 

The classic passage on "involuntary memory" in Proust — prelude to the moment | 
in which the effect of the madeleine on the narrator is described: "And so it was 

that, for a long time afterward, when I lay awake at night and revived old g 

memories of Gombray, I saw no more of it than this sort of luminous panel. ... I « 

must own that I could have assured any questioner that Gombray did include !? 
other scenes. . . . But since the facts which I should then have recalled would 

have been prompted only by the voluntary memory, the intellectual memory, 0 

and since the information which that kind of memory gives us about the past cj- 

preserves nothing of the past itself, I should never have had any wish to ponder >n 

over this residue of Gombray. . . . And so it is with our own past. It is a labor in | 

vain to attempt to recapture it: all the efforts of our intellect must prove futile. f 

The past is hidden somewhere outside the realm, beyond the reach, of intellect, '. 

in some material object . . . which we do not suspect. And as for that object, it | 
depends on chance whether we come upon it or not before we ourselves must 
die." Marcel Proust, Du Cote de chez Swann, vol. 1, pp. 67-69. 2fi [K8a,l] 

The classic passage on awakening at night in a dark room and the ensuing 
orientation: "When I awoke like this, and my mind struggled in an unsuccessful 
attempt to discover where I was, everything would be moving round me through 
the darkness: things, places, years. My body, still too heavy with sleep to move, 
would make an effort to construe the form which its tiredness took as an orienta- 
tion of its various members, so as to deduce from that where the wall lay and the 
furniture stood, to piece together and to give a name to the house in which it 
must be living. Its memory, the composite memory of its ribs, knees, and shoul- 
der-blades, offered it a whole series of rooms in which it had at one time or 
another slept, while the unseen walls kept changing, adapting themselves to the 
shape of each successive room that it remembered, whirling madly through the 
darkness. And even before my brain . . . had collected sufficient impressions . . . 
to identify the room, it, my body, would recall from each room in succession 
what the bed was like, where the doors were, how daylight came in at the 
windows, whether there was a passage outside, what I had in my mind when I 
went to sleep, and had found there when I awoke." Marcel Proust, Du Cote de 
chez Swann, vol. 1, p. 15. 27 [K8a,2] 



Proust on nights of deep sleep after great exhaustion: "Good nights . . . turn so 
effectively the soil and break through the surface stone of our body that we 



bp 



discover there, where our muscles dive down and throw out their twisted roots 
and breathe the air of the new life, the garden in which as a child we used to play. 
There is no need to travel in order to see it again; we must dig down inwardly to 
discover it. What once covered the earth is no longer upon it but beneath; a mere 
excursion does not suffice for a visit to the dead city — excavation is necessary 
also." These words run counter to the injunction to revisit the sites of one's 
childhood. And they lose not a whit of their sense when taken as a critique of the 
memoir e volontaire. Marcel Proust, Le Cote de Gueimantes (Paris, 1920), vol. 1, 
p. 82. 28 [K9.1] 



Linking of Proust's oeuvre to the work of Baudelaire: "One of the masterpieces 
of French literature — Sylvie, by Gerard de Nerval — like the Memoires d'outre- 
tombe <of Chateaubriand) . . . , contains a sensation of the same character as the 
savor of the madeleine. . . . And finally, in Baudelaire, these reminiscences are still 
more frequent and obviously less incidental and therefore, in my opinion, deci- 
sive. Here it is the poet himself who, with more variety and more indolence, 
purposely seeks in the odor of a woman's hair or her breast, for example, inspir- 
ing resemblances which shall evoke for him 'the canopy of overarching sky' and 
'a harbor filled with masts and sails.' I was going to endeavor to recall the poems 
of Baudelaire which are based in similar manner on a transferred sensation, in 
order definitely to place myself again in line with such a noble literary heritage 
and reassure myself that the work I was now about to undertake without any 
further hesitation was worth the effort I was going to devote to it, when I reached 
the foot of the stairs . . . and suddenly found myself ... in the midst of a fete." 
Marcel Proust, Le Temps retrouve (Paris <1927>), vol. 2, pp. 82-83. 2il [K.9,2] 



"Man is himself, is man, only at the surface. Lift the skin, dissect: here begin the 
machines. It is then you lose yourself in an inexplicable substance, something alien 
to everything you know, and which is nonetheless the essential." Paul Valery, 
CahierB, 1910 (Paris <1930>), pp. 39-40. [K.9,3] 



Dream city of Napoleon I: "Napoleon, who originally had wanted to erect the Arc 
de Triomphe somewhere inside the city, like the disappointing first effort made at 
the Place du Caroussel, let himself be persuaded by Fontaine to start construction 
west of the city, where a large tract of land was at his disposal, on an imperial Paris 
that would surpass the royal city, Versailles included. Between the summit of the 
Avenue des Champs-Elysees and the Seine, ... on the plateau where today the 
Trocadero stands, was to be built , 'with palaces for twelve kings and their reti- 
nues,' . . . 'not only the most beautiful city that ever was, but the most beautiful 
city that ever could be.' The Arc de Triomphe was conceived as the first edifice of 
this city." Fritz Stahl, Paris (Berlin <1929>), pp. 27-28. [KJa.l] 