[Dream House, Museum, Spa] 



The genteel variant of the dream house. The entrance to the panorama of 
Gropius is described as follows: "One enters a room decorated in the style of 
Herculaneum; at its center the passerby is drawn for a moment to a basin inlaid 
with shells, in which a small fountain is plashing. Straight ahead, a little flight of 
stairs leads to a cheerful reading room where some volumes are displayed — nota- 
bly, a collection of books designed to acquaint foreigners with the royal resi- 
dence." Erich Stenger, Daguerres Diorama in Berlin (Berlin, 1925), pp. 24-25. 
Bulwer<-Lytton>'s novel. When did the excavations begin? Foyers of casinos, and 
the like, belong to this elegant variant of the dream house. Why a fountain in a 
covered space is conducive to daydreaming has yet to be explained. But in order 
to gauge the shudder of dread and exaltation that might have come over the idle 
visitor who stepped across this threshold, it must be remembered that the discov- 
ery of Pompeii and Herculaneum had taken place a generation earlier, and that 
the memory of the lava-death of these two cities was covertly but all the more 
intimately conjoined with the memory of the great Revolution. For when the 
sudden upheaval had put an end to the style of the ancien regime, what was here 
being exhumed was hastily adopted as the style of a glorious republic; and palm 
fronds, acanthus leaves, and meanders came to replace the rococo paintings and 
chinoueries of the previous century. D Antiquity D [Ll,l] 

"Suddenly, however, they want to transform the French, with one wave of a magic 
wand, into a people of classical antiquity; and on this whim of dreamers isolated in 
their private lihraries (the goddess Minerva notwithstanding), numerous artistic 
endeavors have depended." Friedrich Johann Lorenz Meyer, Frmgmente aus 
Paris im IV"'" Jahr der franzosischen Republic (Hamburg, 1797), vol. 1, p. 146. 
D Antiquity D [Ll,2] 

Dream houses of the collective: arcades, winter gardens, panoramas, factories, 
wax museums, casinos, railroad stations. [Ll>3] 

The Gare Saint-Lazare: a puffing, wheezing princess with the stare of a clock. 
"For our type of man," says Jacques de Lacretelle, "train stations are truly facto- 
ries of dreams" ("Le Reveur parisien," Nouvelle Revue francaue, 1927). To be sure: 



today, in the age of the automobile and airplane, it is only faint, atavistic terrors 
which still lurk within the blackened sheds; and that stale comedy of farewell and 
reunion, carried on before a background of Pullman cars, turns the railway 
platform into a provincial stage. Once again we see performed the timeworn 
Greek melodrama: Orpheus, Eurydice, and Hermes at the station. Through the 
mountains of luggage surrounding the figure of the nymph, looms the steep and 
rocky path, the crypt into which she sinks when the Hermaic conductor with the 
signal disk, watching for the moist eye of Orpheus, gives the sign for departure. 
Scar of departure, which zigzags, like the crack on a Greek vase, across the 
painted bodies of the gods. [Ll,4] 

The domestic interior moves outside. It is as though the bourgeois were so sure 
of his prosperity that he is careless of facade, and can exclaim: My house, no 
matter where you choose to cut into it, is facade. Such facades, especially, on the 
Berlin houses dating back to the middle of the previous century: an alcove does 
not jut out, but — as niche — tucks in. The street becomes room and the room 
becomes street. The passerby who stops to look at the house stands, as it were, in 
the alcove. D Flaneur D [Ll,5] 

On the dream house. The arcade as temple: the habitue of those "ohscure ba- 
zaars" of the bourgeois arcades "will find himself almost on foreign ground in the 
Passage de 1'Opera. He will be profoundly ill at ease there; he will be anxious to 
leave. Another moment and he will discover himself a master, as if he had pene- 
trated the temple of God." Le Livre des cent-et-un, vol. 10 (Paris, 1833), p. 71 
(Amedee Kermel, "Les Passages de Paris"). [Ll,6] 

Apropos of the colored windowpanes which were beginning to be installed in stair- 
ways (and these stairs were often waxed!) Alphonse Karr writes: "The staircase 
has remained something that looks more like a machine of war for defending one's 
house against enemies than a means of communication and access offered to 
friends." Alphonse Karr, 300 pages, new edition (Paris, 1861), pp. 198-199. 

[L1.7] 

The house has always shown itself "barely receptive to new formulations." Sig- 
fried Giedion, Bauen in Frankreich <Berlin, 1928>, p. 78. [LI, 8] 

Arcades are houses or passages having no outside — like the dream. [Lla,l] 

Museums unquestionably belong to the dream houses of the collective. In con- 
sidering them, one would want to emphasize the dialectic by which they come 
into contact, on the one hand, with scientific research and, on the other hand, 
with "the dreamy tide of bad taste." "Nearly every epoch would appear, by virtue 
of its inner disposition, to be chiefly engaged in unfolding a specific architectural 
problem: for the Gothic age, this is the cathedrals; for the Baroque, the palace; 
and for the early nineteenth century, with its regressive tendency to allow itself to 



be saturated with the past: the museum." Sigfried Giedion, Bauen in Frankreich, g 

p. 36. This thirst for the past forms something like the principal object of my ^ 

analysis — in light of which the inside of the museum appears as an interior ^ 

magnified on a giant scale. In the years 1850-1890, exhibitions take the place of rj 
museums. Comparison between the ideological bases of the two. [Lla,2] 



re 



an 



"The nineteenth century provided all new creations, in every area of endeavor, 
with historicizing masks. This was no less true in the field of architecture than in 
the field of industry or society. New possibilities of construction were being intro- 
duced, hut people felt almost fear at the advent of these new possibilities and 
heedlessly buried them in theatrical decoration. The enormous collective appara- 
tus of industry was being put in place, but its significance was altered entirely by Tm 
the fact that the benefits of the production process were allowed to accrue to only a 
small number. This historicizing mask is indissolubly bound to the image of the 
nineteenth century, and is not to be gainsaid." Sigfried Giedion, Bauen in Frank- 
reich, pp. 1-2. [Lla,3J 

Le Corbusier's work seems to stand at the terminus of the mythological figura- 
tion "house." Compare the following: "Why should the house be made as light 
and airy as possible? Because only in that way can a fatal and hereditary monu- 
mentality be brought to an end. As long as the play of burden and support, 
whether actually or symbolically exaggerated (Baroque), got its meaning from 
the supporting walls, heaviness was justified. But today — with the unburdened 
exterior wall — the ornamentally accentuated counterpoint of pillar and load is a 
painful farce (American skyscrapers)." Giedion, Bauen in Frankreich, p. 85. 

[Lla,4] 

Le Corbusier's "contemporary city" 1 is yet another settlement along a highway. 
Only the fact that now its precincts are traveled over by autos, and that airplanes 
now land in its midst, changes everything. An effort must be made to secure a 
foothold here from which to cast a productive glance, a form-and-distance-creat- 
ing glance, on the nineteenth century. [Lla,5J 

"The condominium is the last incarnation of the haronial manor. It owes its exist- 
ence and its form to the hrutal egoistic competition of individual landowners for 
the rights to territory that, in the struggle for existence, was being hroken up and 
parceled out. We are therefore not surprised to see the form of the manor house 
reappearing as well — in the walled courtyard. One occupant secludes himself from 
another, and that in fact helps to explain why, in the end, a chance remnant of the 
whole survives." Adolf Behne, Neues Wohnen — Neues Bauen (Leipzig, 1927), 
pp. 93-94. [Lla,6] 



The museum as dream house. "We have seen how the Bourbons already thought it 
important that the ancestors of their house he glorified and that the earlier history 
of France, in all its splendor and significance, he recognized once again. Hence, 



they also arranged to have outstanding moments from French history and French 
cultural evolution depicted on the ceilings of the Louvre." Julius Meyer, 
Geschichte der modernenfranzdsischen Malerei (Leipzig, 1867), p. 424. [Lla,7] 

In June of 1837 — "to the everlasting glory of France" — the historic museum of 
Versailles was opened. A suite of rooms that one needs almost two hours merely 
to traverse. Battles and scenes of parliament. Among the painters: Gosse, 
Lariviere, Heim, Deveria, Gerard, Ary Scheffer, and others. Here, then, the 
collecting of pictures turns into: the painting of pictures for the museum. [L2,l] 

Interlacing of museum and domestic inteiior. M. Chabrillat (1882, director of the 
Ambigu theater) one day inherits a complete waxworks museum, "set up in the 
Passage de l'Opera, right above the clock." (Perhaps it was the old Hartkoff 
Museum.) Chabrillat is friends with a certain bohemien, a gifted draftsman, who 
at the time is homeless. This man has an idea. Among the waxworks in this mu- 
seum is one group representing the visit of Empress Eugenie to cholera patients in 
Amiens. At the right, the empress smiles on the patients; to the left is a Sister of 
Charity in white cornet - , and lying on an iron cot, pale and emaciated beneath the 
fine clean bedclothes, is a dying man. The museum closes at midnight. The drafts- 
man opines: Nothing simpler than to remove, with due care, the cholera patient, 
lay him on the floor, and take his place in the bed. Chabrillat gives his permission; 
the wax figures mean little to him. For the next six weeks, then, the artist, having 
just heen thrown out of his hotel, spends the night in the bed of the cholera victim, 
and each morning he awakens under the gentle glance of the sicknurse and the 
smiling glance of the empress, who lets her blond hair fall on him. From Jules 
Claretie, La Vie a Paris, 1882 (Paris <1883>), pp. 301ff. [L2,2] 

"How much I admire those men who decide to be shut up at night in a museum 
in order to examine at their own discretion, at an illicit time, some portrait of a 
woman they illuminate by a dark lantern. Inevitably, afterward, they must know 
much more about such a woman than we do." Andre Breton, Nadja (Paris 
<1928>) , p. 150. 2 But why? Because, in the medium of this image, the transforma- 
tion of the museum into an interior has taken place. [L2,3] 

The dream house of the arcades is encountered again in the church. Encroach- 
ment of the architectural style of the arcades on sacred architecture. Concerning 
Notre Dame de Lorette: "The interior of this building is without doubt in excel- 
lent taste, only it is not the interior of a church. The splendid ceiling would 
suitably adorn the most brilliant ballroom in the world; the graceful lamps of 
bronze, with their frosted glass globes in different colors, look as though they 
came from the city's most elegant cafes." S. F. Lahrs <?>, Briefe aus Paris, in 
Europa: Chronik der gebildeten Welt (Leipzig and Stuttgart, 1837), vol. 2, p. 209. 

[L2.4] 

"As for the new and not yet finished theaters, they appear to helong to no particu- 
lar style. The intention, evidently, is to integrate private into public uses by con- 



structing private residential dwellings all around the perimeter, so that these thea- 
ters can hardly become anything other than colossal containers, giant capsules for 
all sorts of things." Grenzboten, 1861, 2nd semester, vol. 3, p. 143 ("Die Pariser 
Kunstausstellungvon 1861"). [L2,5] 

Think of the arcade as watering place. What we would like is to stumble upon an 
arcade myth, with a legendary source at its center — an asphalt wellspring arising 
at the heart of Paris. The tavern advertising beer "on tap" still draws on this myth 
of the waters. And the extent to which healing is a rite de passage, a transition 
experience, becomes vividly clear in those classical corridors where the sick and 
ailing turn into their recovery, as it were. Those halls, too, are arcades. 3 Compare 
fountains in the vestibule. [L2,6] 

The dread of doors that won't close is something everyone knows from dreams. 
Stated more precisely: these are doors that appear closed without being so. It was 
with heightened senses that I learned of this phenomenon in a dream in which, 
while I was in the company of a friend, a ghost appeared to me in the window of 
the ground floor of a house to our right. And as we walked on, the ghost 
accompanied us from inside all the houses. It passed through all the walls and 
always remained at the same height with us. I saw this, though I was blind. The 
path we travel through arcades is fundamentally just such a ghost walk, on which 
doors give way and walls yield. [L2,7] 

The figure of wax is properly the setting wherein the appearance <Schein> of 
humanity outdoes itself. In the wax figure, that is, the surface area, complexion, 
and coloration of the human being are all rendered with such perfect and unsur- 
passable exactitude that this reproduction of human appearance itself is outdone, 
and now the mannequin incarnates nothing but the hideous, cumiing mediation 
between costume and viscera. D Fashion □ [L2a,l] 

Description of a wax museum as dream house: "Once visitors reached the final 
landing, they looked around the corner into a large, brightly lit room. There was, 
so to say, no one within, though it was filled with princes, crinolines, uniforms, and 
giants at the entrance. The woman went no further, and her escort paused beside 
her, piqued hy a haleful pleasure. They sat down on the steps, and he told her of 
the terror he had experienced as a hoy in reading ahout ill-famed castles where no 
one lived any longer, but where on stormy nights there were lights hurning at all 
the windows. What was going on inside? What gathering was there? Where was 
that light coming from? He had dreamed of catching a glimpse of this assembly 
while hanging from the window ledge, his face pressed against the windowpanes of 
the unspeakahle room." Ernst Bloch, "Leib und Wachsfigur," Frankfurter Zeit- 
ung <December 19, 1929>. [L2a,2] 



"Numher 125: Castan's maze. At first, world travelers and artists suppose them- 
selves transported into the forest of columns that is the magnificent mosque of 
Cordova in Spain. As arch succeeds arch in that edifice, one column crowds upon 



the next in perspective, offering fabulous vistas and unthinkably long avenues 
which no one could foJlow to the end. Then, suddenly, we behold an image that 
takes us into the very heart of the famous Alhambra of Granada. We see the 
tapestry pattern of the Alhambra, with its inscription 'Allah is AJlah' (God is 
great), and already we are standing in a garden, in the orange grove of the Alham- 
bra. But before the visitor arrives at tins courtyard, he must pass through a series 
of labyrinthine divagations." Catalogue of Castan's panopticon 1 (from extracts in 
the Frankfurter Zeitung). [L2a,3] 

"The success of the Romantic school gave rise, around 1825, to the market in 
modern paintings. Before that, art lovers went to the homes of artists. Sellers of 
artists' pigments — Giroux, Suisse, Binant, Berville — began to function as middle- 
men. The first retail house was opened by Goupil in 1829." <Lucien> Dubech and 
<Pierre> d'Espezel, Histoire de Paris (Paris, 1926), p. 359. [L2a,4] 

"The Opera is one of the characteristic creations of the Second Empire. It was 
designed by an unknown young architect, Charles Garnier, whose plan was se- 
lected from among 160 projects submitted. His theater, constructed in the years 
1861-1875, was conceived as a place of pageantry. ... It was the stage on which 
imperial Paris could gaze at itself with satisfaction. Classes newly risen to power 
and to fortune, blendings of cosmopolitan elements — this was a new world, and it 
called for a new name: people no longer spoke of the Court, but of le Tout Paris <all 
fashionable Paris>. ... A theater conceived as an urban center, a center of social 
life — this was a new idea, and a sign of the times." Dubech and d'Espezel, Histoire 
de Paris, pp. 411-412. [L2a,5] 

To set up, within the actual city of Paris, Paris the dream city — as an aggregate of 
all the building plans, street layouts, park projects, and street-name systems that 
were never developed. [L2a,6] 

The arcade as temple of Aesculapius, medicinal spring. The course of a cure. 
(Arcades as resort spas in ravines — at Schuls-Tarasp, at Ragaz.) The gorge as 
landscape ideal in the nineteenth century. [L3,l] 

Jacques Fahien, Paris en songe (Paris, 1863), reports on the moving of the Porte 
Saint-Martin and the Porte Saint-Denis: "They are no less admired on the summits 
of the Faubourgs Saint-Martin and Saint-Denis" (p. 86). In this way, the areas 
around the gates, which had sunk quite noticeahly, were able to regain their origi- 
nal level. [L3,2] 

Proposal to cover the dead hodies in the morgue with an oilcloth from the neck 
down. "The public lines up at the door and is allowed to examine at its leisure the 
nude cadavers of the unknown dead . . . One day, morality will be given its due; 
and thereafter the worker who now goes at lunchtime to visit the morgue — hands 
in pockets, pipe in mouth, smile on lips — in order to crack jokes over the more or 



less putrefied naked bodies, of both sexes, will soon lose interest in the sparse 
mise-en-scene. I do not exaggerate. These smutty scenes are enacted every day at 
the morgue; people laugh there, smoke there, and chattel- loudly." Edouard Fou- 
caud, Paris inventeur: Physiologie de I'industriefranqaise (Paris, 1844), pp. 212- 
213. [L3,3] 

An engraving from around 1830, perhaps a little earlier, shows copyists at work in 
various ecstatic postures. Caption: "Artistic Inspiration at the Museum." Cabinet 
des Estampes. [L3,4] 

On the beginnings of the museum at Versailles: "M. de Montalivet was in a hurry to 
acquire a quantity of paintings. He wanted them everywhere, and, since the 
Chambers had decried prodigality, he was determined to buy cheaply. The trend 
was toward thrift . . . M. de Montalivet willingly ... let it be thought that it was he 
himself who, on the quays and in the dealers' shops, was buying up third-rate 
canvases. . . . No, ... it was the reigning princes of art who were indulging in this 
hideous business . . . The copies and pastiches in the museum at Versailles are the 
most grievous confirmation of the rapacity of those master artists, who became 
entrepreneurs and barterers of art. . . . Business and industry decided to elevate 
themselves to the level of the artist. The latter, in order to satisfy his need for the 
luxuries which were heginning to tempt him, prostituted art to speculation and 
brought about the degeneration of the artistic tradition by his calculated reduction 
of art to the proportions of a trade." This last refers to the fact that [around 1837] 
painters were passing on to their students commissions they had accepted them- 
selves. Gabriel Pelin, Les Laideurs du beau Paris (Paris, 1861), pp. 85, 87-90. 

[L3,5] 

On suhterranean Paris — old sewers. "We shall form an image more closely resem- 
hling this strange geometric plan by supposing that we see spread upon a back- 
ground of darkness some grotesque alphahet of the East jumbled as in a medley, 
the shapeless letters of which are joined to one another, apparently pell-mell and 
as if by chance, sometimes by their corners, sometimes by their extremities." 
Victor Hugo, Oeuvres completes, novels, vol. 9 (Paris, 1881), pp. 158-159 (Les 
Miserables).* [L3a,l] 

Sewers: "All manner of phantoms haunt these long solitary corridors, putridity 
and miasma everywhere; here and there a breathing-hole through which Villon 
within chats with Rabelais without." Victor Hugo, Oeuvres completes, novels, vol. 
9 (Paris, 1881), p. 160 (Les Miserables ).'' [L3a,2] 

Victor Hugo on the obstacles which hindered Parisian digging and tunneling op- 
erations: "Paris is huilt upon a deposit singularly rebellious to the spade, to the 
hoe, to the drill, to human control. Nothing more difficult to pierce and to pene- 
trate than that geological formation upon which is superposed the wonderful his- 
torical formation called Paris; as soon as . . . labor commences and ventures into 



that sheet of alluvium, subterranean resistance abounds. There are liquid clays, 
living springs, hard rocks, those soft deep mires which technical science calls 
moutardes. The pick advances laboriously into these calcareous strata alternating 
with seams of very fine clay and laminar schistose beds, encrusted with oyster 
shells contemporary with the pre-Adamite oceans." Victor Hugo, Oeuvres com- 
pletes, novels, vol. 9 (Paris, 1881), pp. 178-179 (Les Miser ables ). 7 [L3a,3] 

Sewer: "Paris . . . called it the Stink-Hole. . . . The Stink-Hole was no less revolt- 
ing to hygiene than to legend. The Goblin Monk had appeared under the fetid arch 
of the Mouf fetard sewer; the corpses of the Marmousets had been thrown into the 
sewer of the Barillerie. . . . The mouth of the sewer of the Rue de la Mortellerie was 
famous for the pestilence which came from it. . . . Bruneseau had made a begin- 
ning, but it required the cholera epidemics to determine the vast reconstruction 
which has since taken place." Victor Hugo, Oeuvres completes, novels, vol. 9 
(Paris, 1881), pp. 166, 180 (Les Miserables, "LTntestin de Leviathan")." [L3a,4] 

1805 — Bruneseau's descent into the sewers: "Hardly had Bruneseau passed the 
first branchings of the subterranean network, when eight out of the twenty labor- 
ers refused to go further. . . . They advanced with difficulty. It was not uncommon 
for the stepladders to plunge into three feet of mire. The lanterns flickered in the 
miasmas. From time to time, a sewerman who had fainted was carried out. At 
certain places, a precipice. The soil had sunk, the pavement had crumbled, the 
sewer had changed into a blind well; they found no solid ground. One man sud- 
denly disappeared; they had great difficulty in recovering him. On the advice of 
Fourcroy, they lighted from point to point, in the places sufficiently purified, great 
cages full of oakum saturated with resin. The wall, in places, was covered with 
shapeless fungi — one would have said with tumors. The stone itself seemed dis- 
eased in this unbreathable atmosphere. . . . They thought they recognized here 
and there, chiefly under the Palais de Justice, some cells of ancient dungeons built 
in the sewer itself. . . . An iron collar hung in one of these cells. They walled them 
all up. . . . The complete survey of the underground sewer system of Paris occu- 
pied seven years, from 1805 to 1812. . . . Nothing equaled the horror of this old 
voiding crypt, . . . cavern, grave, gulf pierced with streets, titanic molehill, in 
which the mind seems to see prowling through the shadow . . . that enormous blind 
mole, the past." Victor Hugo, Oeuvres completes, novels, vol. 9 (Paris, 1881), 
pp. 169-171, 173-174 (Les Miserables, "LTntestin de Leviathan"). 9 [L4,l] 

In coimection with the passage from Gerstacker. ! ' An undersea jeweler's shop: 
"We came into the underwater hall of the jeweler's. Never would one have 
believed it possible to be so far removed from terra finna. An immense dome . . . 
overspread the entire marketplace, which was filled with the brilliant glow of 
electricity and the happy busde of crowds, and an assortment of shops with 
glittering display windows." Leo Claretie, Paris depuis ses origines jusqu'en I' an 
3000 (Paris, 1886), p. 337 ("En 1987"). It is significant that this image resurfaces 
just when die beginning of the end has arrived for the arcades. [L4,2] 



The sewers ofPaiis, 1861-1862. Photo by Nadar. Courtesy of the Bibliotheque Nation- 
ale de France. See L4,l. 

Proudhon takes a keen interest in the paintings of Courbet and, with the help of 
vague definitions (of "ethics in action") , enlists them in his cause. [L4,3] 

Woefully inadequate references to mineral springs in Koch, who writes of the 
poems dedicated by Goethe to Maria Ludovica at Karlsbad: "The essential thing 
for him in these 'Karlsbad poems' is not the geology but . . . the thought and the 
sensation that healing energies emanate from the otherwise unapproachable per- 



son of the princess. The intimacy of life at the spa creates a fellow feeling . . . with 
the noble lady. Thus, ... in the presence of the mystery of the springs, health 
comes . . . from the proximity of the princess." Richard Koch, Der £auber der 
Heilquellen (Stuttgart, 1933), p. 21. [L4,4] 

Whereas a journey ordinarily gives the bourgeois the illusion of slipping the ties 
that bind him to his social class, the watering place fortifies his consciousness of 
belonging to the upper class. It does this not only by bringing him into contact 
with feudal strata. Mornand draws attention to a more elementary circumstance: 
"In Paris there are no doubt larger crowds, but none so homogeneous as this one; 
for most of the sad human beings who make up those crowds will have eaten 
either badly or hardly at all. . . . But at Baden, nothing of the sort: everyone is 
happy, seeing that everyone's at Baden." Felix Mornand, La Vie des eaux (Paris, 
1855), pp. 256-257. [L4 a ,l] 

The meditative stroll through the pump room proves advantageous to business, 
chiefly through the agency of art. The contemplative attitude that schools itself 
on the work of art is slowly transformed into an attitude more covetous of the 
wares on display. "Having taken a turn before the Trinkhalle, ... or beneath the 
frescoed peristyle of this Greco-German-Italianate colonnade, one will come in- 
doors, . . . read the newspapers for a while, price the art objects, examine the 
watercolors, and drink a small glassful." Felix Mornand, La Vie des eaux (Paris, 
1855), pp. 257-258. [L4 a ,2] 

Dungeons of Chatelet <see also C5a ,1>: "Those cells, the mere thought of which 
strikes terror into the hearts of the people, . . . have lent their stones to the one 
theater above all where people love to go for a good time, since there they hear of 
the undying glory of their sons on the fields of battle." Eclouard Fournier, 
Chroniques et legendes des rues de Paris (Paris, 1864), pp. 155-156. The refer- 
ence is to the Theatre du Chatelet, originally a circus. [L4a,3] 

The revised title page of Meryon's Eaux-fortes sur Paris <Etchings of Paris) de- 
picts a weighty stone whose age is attested to by the encrusted shells and the 
cracks. The title of the cycle is engraved in this stone. "Burty remarks that the 
shells, and the imprint of moss preserved in the limestone, indicate clearly that 
this stone was chosen from among the specimens of ancient Parisian soil in the 
quarries of Montmartre." Gustave Geffroy, Charles Meryon (Paris, 1926), p. 47. 

[L4 a ,4] 

In "Le Joueur genereux," Baudelaire meets with Satan in his infernal gamhling 
den, "a dazzling subterranean dwelling of a fabulous luxury heyond anything the 
upper habitations of Paris could offer." Charles Baudelaire, Le Spleen de Paris, 
ed. R. Simon (Paris), p. 49." [L4 a ,5] 



The gate belongs in a context with the rites de passage. "However it may be 
indicated, one enters the way — whether it be between two sticks driven into the 



ground and sometimes set leaning toward each other, or through a tree trunk 
split in the middle and opened up, ... or under a birch limb bent into an 
arch. ... In these cases, it is always a matter of escaping a hostile . . . element, 
getting clear of some stain, separating off contagion or the spirits of the dead, 
who caimot follow through the narrow opening." Ferdinand Noack, Triumph und 
Triumphbogen, series entitled Vortrage der Bibliothek Warburg, vol. 5 (Leipzig, 
1928), p. 153. Whoever enters an arcade passes through the gate-way in the 
opposite direction. 112 (Or rather, he ventures into the intrauterine world.) [L5,l] 



According to K. Meister, Die Hausschioelle in Sprache und Religion der Romer, 
Proceedings of the Heidelberg Academy of Sciences, Division of Philosophy and 
History, 1924-1925, Treatise 3 (Heidelherg, 1925), the threshold does not have for 
the Greeks, or indeed for any other people, the importance it has for the Romans. 
The treatise is concerned essentially with the genesis of the sublimis as the exalted 
(originally what is carried aloft). [L5,2] 



"Nevertheless, we see a continuous stream of new works in which the city is the 
main character, present throughout, and in whieh the name of Paris almost always 
figures in the title, indicating that the public likes things this way. Under these 
conditions, how could there not develop in each reader the deep-seated conviction 
(which is evident even today) that the Paris he knows is not the only Paris, not even 
the true one, that it is only a stage set, brilliantly illuminated but too normal — a 
piece of scenery which the stagehands will never do away with, and which conceals 
another Paris, the real Paris, a nocturnal, spectral, imperceptible Paris." Roger 
Caillois, "Paris, mythe moderne," Nouvelle Revue franqaise, 25, no. 284 (May 1, 
1937), p. 687. [L5,3] 



"Cities, like forests, have their dens in which all their vilest and most terrible 
monsters hide." Victor Hugo, Les Miser ables, part 3 <Oeuvres completes, novels, 
vol. 7 (Paris, 1881), p. 306>. 13 [L5,4] 

There are relations between department store and museum, and here the bazaar 
provides a link. The amassing of artworks in the museum brings them into 
communication with commodities, which — where they offer themselves en 
masse to the passerby — awake in him the notion that some part of this should fall 
to him as well. [L5,5] 



"The city of the dead, Pere Lachaise . . . The word 'cemetery' cannot properly be 
used for this particular layout, which is modeled on the necropolises of the ancient 
world. This veritable urban establishment — with its stone houses for the dead and 
its profusion of statues, which, in contrast to the custom of the Christian north, 
represent the dead as living — is conceived throughout as a continuation of the city 
of the living." (The name comes from the owner of the land, thefather confessor of 
Louis XIV; the plan is hy Napoleon I.) Fritz Stahl, Paris (Berlin <1929>), pp. 161- 
162. [L5 a ] 