[The Flaneur] 



A landscape haunts, intense as opium. 

— Mallanne <"Autref ois, en marge d'un Baudelaire," in Divagations> 

To read what was never written. 
— Hofmannsthal 1 

And I travel in order to get to know my geography. 

— A madman, in Marcel Reja, L'Art chei les fous (Paris, 1907), p. 131 

All that can be found anywhere can be found in Paris. 

— Victor Hugo, Les Mise'rables, in Hugo, Oeiwres completes (Paris, 
1881), novels, vol. 7, p. 30, from the chapter "Ecce Paris, Ecce 
Homo" 2 



But the great reminiscences, the historical shudder — these are a trumpery which 
he (the flaneur) leaves to tourists, who think thereby to gain access to the genius 
loci with a military password. Our friend may well keep silent. At the approach of 
his footsteps, the place has roused; speechlessly, mindlessly, its mere intimate 
nearness gives him hints and instructions. He stands before Notre Dame de 
Lorette, and his soles remember: here is the spot where in former times the cheval 
de renfort — the spare horse — was harnessed to the omnibus that climbed the Rue 
des Martyrs toward Montmartre. Often, he would have given all he knows about 
the domicile of Balzac or of Gavarni, about the site of a surprise attack or even of 
a barricade, to be able to catch the scent of a threshold or to recognize a paving 
stone by touch, like any watchdog. [ M 1 , 1 ] 

The street conducts the flaneur into a vanished time. For him, every street is 
precipitous. It leads downward — if not to the mythical Mothers, then into a past 
that can be all the more spellbinding because it is not his own, not private. 
Nevertheless, it always remains the time of a childhood. But why that of the life 
he has lived? In the asphalt over which he passes, his steps awaken a surprising 
resonance. Hie gaslight that streams down on the paving stones throws an 
equivocal light on this double ground. [Ml ,2] 



An intoxication comes over the man who walks long and aimlessly through the 
streets. With each step, the walk takes on greater momentum; ever weaker grow 
the temptations of shops, of bistros, of smiling women, ever more irresistible the 
magnetism of the next streetcorner, of a distant mass of foliage, of a street name. 
Then comes hunger. Our man wants nothing to do with the myriad possibilities 
offered to sate his appetite. Like an ascetic animal, he flits through unknown 
districts — until, utterly exhausted, he stumbles into his room, which receives him 
coldly and wears a strange air. [M 1,3] 

Paris created the type of the flaneur. What is remarkable is that it wasn't Rome. 
And the reason? Does not dreaming itself take the high road in Rome? And isn't 
that city too full of temples, enclosed squares, national shrines, to be able to enter 
tout entiere — with every cobblestone, every shop sign, every step, and every gate- 
way — into the passerby's dream? The national character of the Italians may also 
have much to do with this. For it is not the foreigners but they themselves, the 
Parisians, who have made Paris the promised land of the flaneur — the "landscape 
built of sheer life," as Hof mannsthal once put it. Landscape — that, in fact, is what 
Paris becomes for the flaneur. Or, more precisely: the city splits for him into its 
dialectical poles. It opens up to him as a landscape, even as it closes around him 
as a room. [M 1 ,4] 

That ananmestic intoxication in which the flaneur goes about the city not only 
feeds on the sensory data taking shape before his eyes but often possesses itself of 
abstract knowledge — indeed, of dead facts — as something experienced and lived 
through. This felt knowledge travels from one person to another, especially by 
word of mouth. But in the course of the nineteenth century, it was also deposited 
in an immense literature. Even before Lefeuve, who described Paris "street by 
street, house by house," there were numerous works that depicted this storied 
landscape as backdrop for the dreaming idler. The study of these books consti- 
tuted a second existence, already wholly predisposed toward dreaming; and 
what the flaneur learned from them took form and figure during an afternoon 
walk before the aperitif. Wouldn't he, then, have necessarily felt the steep slope 
behind the church of Notre Dame de Lorette rise all the more insistently under 
his soles if he realized: here, at one time, after Paris had gotten its first omnibuses, 
the cheval de renfort was harnessed to the coach to reinforce the two other horses. 

[M1.5] 

One must make an effort to grasp the altogether fascinating moral constitution of 
the passionate flaneur. The police — who here, as on so many of the subjects we 
are treating, appear as experts — provide the following indication in the report of 
a Paris secret agent from October 1798(?) : "It is almost impossible to summon 
and maintain good moral character in a thickly massed population where each 
individual, unbeknownst to all the others, hides in the crowd, so to speak, and 
blushes before the eyes of no one." Cited in Adolf Schmidt, Paruer £ustdnde 
wdhrend der Revolution, vol. 3 (Jena, 1876). The case in which the flaneur com- 



pletely distances himself from the type of the philosophical promenader, and 
takes on the features of the werewolf restlessly roaming a social wilderness, was 
fixed for the first time and forever afterward by Poe in his story "The Man of the 
Crowd." [Ml,6] 

The appearances of superposition, of overlap, which come with hashish may be 
grasped through the concept of similitude. When we say that one face is similar 
to another, we mean that certain features of this second face appear to us in the 
first, without the latter's ceasing to be what it has been. Nevertheless, the possi- 
bilities of entering into appearance in this way are not subject to any criterion and 
are therefore boundless. The category of similarity, which for the waking con- 
sciousness has only minimal relevance, attains unlimited relevance in the world 
of hashish. There, we may say, everything is face: each thing has the degree of 
bodily presence that allows it to be searched — as one searches a face — for such 
traits as appear. Under these conditions even a sentence (to say nothing of the 
single word) puts on a face, and this face resembles that of the sentence standing 
opposed to it. In this way every truth points manifestly to its opposite, and this 
state of affairs explains the existence of doubt. Truth becomes something living; 
it lives solely in the rhythm by which statement and counterstatement displace 
each other in order to think each other. 3 [Mla,l] 

Valery Larbaud on the "moral climate of the Parisian street." "Relations always 
begin with the fiction of equality, of Christian fraternity. In this crowd the inferior 
is disguised as the superior, and the superior as the inferior — disguised morally, 
in both cases. In other capitals of the world, the disguise barely goes beyond the 
appearance, and people visibly insist on their differences, making an effort to 
retain them in the face of pagans and barbarians. Here they efface them as much 
as they can. Hence the peculiar sweetness of the moral climate of Parisian streets, 
the charm which makes one pass over the vulgarity, the indolence, the monotony 
of the crowd. It is the grace of Paris, its virtue: charity. Virtuous crowd . . ." 
Valery Larbaud, "Rues et visages de Paris: Pour l'album de Chas-Laborde," 
Commerce, 8 (Summer 1926), pp. 36-37. Is it permissible to refer this phenomenon 
so confidently to Christian virtue, or is there not perhaps at work here an intoxi- 
cated assimilation, superposition, equalization that in the streets of this city 
proves to carry more weight than the will to social accreditation? One might 
adduce here the hashish experience "Dante und Petrarca," 1 and measure the 
impact of intoxicated experience on the proclamation of the rights of man. This 
all unfolds at a considerable remove from Christianity. [Mla,2] 

The "colportage phenomenon of space" is the flaneur's basic experience. Inas- 
much as this phenomenon also — from another angle — shows itself in the mid- 
nineteenth-century interior, it may not be amiss to suppose that the heyday of 
flanerie occur in this same period. Thanks to this phenomenon, everything poten- 
tially taking place in this one single room is perceived simultaneously. The space 



winks at the flaneur: What do you think may have gone on here? Of course, it 
has yet to be explained how this phenomenon is associated with colportage. 5 
□ History D [Mla,3] 



A true masquerade of space — that is what the British embassy's ball on May 17, 
1839, must have been. "In addition to the glorious flowers from gardens and 
greenhouses, 1,000-1,200 rosebushes were ordered as part of the decoration for 
the festivities. It was said that only 800 of them could fit in the rooms of the 
embassy, but that will give you an idea of the utterly mythological magnificence. 
The garden, covered by a pavilion, was turned into a salon de conversation. But 
what a salon! The gay flower beds, full of blooms, were huge jardinieres which 
everyone came over to admire; the gravel on the walks was covered with fresh 
linen, out of consideration for all the white satin shoes; large sofas of lampas and 
of damask replaced the wrought-iron benches; and on a round table there were 
books and albums. It was a pleasure to take the air in this immense boudoir, 
where one could hear, like a magic chant, the sounds of the orchestra, and where 
one could see passing, like happy shadows, in the diree surrounding flower-lined 
galleries, both the fun-loving girls who came to dance and the more serious girls 
who came to sup." H. d'Almeras, La Vie paruienne sous <.le regne de> Louu- 
Philippe <Paris, 1925>, pp. 446-447. The account derives from Madame de 
Girardin. D Interior D Today, the watchword is not entanglement but transpar- 
ency. (Le Corbusier!) [Mla,4] 

The principle of colportage illustration encroaching on great painting. "The re- 
ports on the engagements and battles which, in the catalogue, were supposed to 
illuminate the moments chosen by the painter for battle scenes, but which failed 
to achieve this goal, were usually augmented with citations of the works from 
which these reports were drawn. Thus, one would find at the end, frequently in 
parentheses: Campagnes d'Espagne, by Marshal Suchet; Bulletin de la Grande Ar- 
mee et rapports qfficiels; Gazette de France, number . . . ; and the like; Hutoire de la 
revolution francaue, by M. Thiers, volume . . . , page . . . ; Victoires et conquetes, 
volume . . . , page . . . ; and so forth and so on." Ferdinand von Gall, Paris und 
seine Salons (Oldenburg, 1844), vol. 1, pp. 198-199. [M2,l] 

Category of illustrative seeing — fundamental for the flaneur. Like Kubin when 
he wrote Andere Seite, he composes his reverie as text to accompany the images. 

[M2,2] 

Hashish. One imitates certain tilings one knows from paintings: prison, the 
Bridge of Sighs, stairs like the train of a dress. [M2,3] 

We know that, in the course of flanerie, far-off times and places interpenetrate the 
landscape and the present moment. When the authentically intoxicated phase of 
this condition announces itself, the blood is pounding in the veins of the happy 
flaneur, his heart ticks like a clock, and inwardly as well as outwardly things go 



on as we would imagine them to do in one of those "mechanical pictures" which 
in the nineteenth century (and of course earlier, too) enjoyed great popularity, 
and which depicts in the foreground a shepherd playing on a pipe, by his side two 
children swaying in time to the music, further back a pair of hunters in pursuit of 
a lion, and very much in the background a train crossing over a trestle bridge. 
Chapuis and Gelis, Le Monde des automates (Paris, 1928), vol. 1, p. 330. 6 [M2,4] 

The attitude of the flaneur — epitome of the political attitude of the middle classes 
during the Second Empire. [M2,5] 

With the steady increase in traffic on the streets, it was only the macadamization 
of the roadways that made it possible in the end to have a conversation on the 
terrace of a cafe without shouting in the other person's ear. [M2,6] 

The laissez-faire of the flaneur has its countetpart even in the revolutionary 
philosophemes of the period. "We smile at the chimerical pretension [of a Saint- 
Simon] to trace all physical and moral phenomena back to the law of universal 
attraction. But we forget too easily that this pretension was not in itself isolated; 
under the influence of the revolutionizing natural laws of mechanics, there could 
arise a current of natural philosophy which saw in the mechanism of nature the 
proof of just such a mechanism of social life and of events generally." <Willy> 
Spiihler, Der Saint-Simonumus (Zurich, 1926), p. 29. [M2,7] 

Dialectic of flanerie: on one side, the man who feels himself viewed by all and 
sundry as a true suspect and, on the other side, the man who is utterly undis- 
coverable, the hidden man. Presumably, it is this dialectic that is developed in 
"The Man of the Crowd." [M2.8] 

"Theory of the transformation of the city into countryside: this was . . . the main 
theme of my unfinished work on Maupassant. ... At issue was the city as hunting 
ground, and in general the coneept of the hunter played a major role (as in the 
theory of the uniform: all hunters look alike)." Letter from Wiesengrund, June 5, 
1935. [M2,9] 

The principle of flanerie in Proust: "Then, quite apart from all those literary 
preoccupations, and without definite attachment to anything, suddenly a roof, a 
gleam of sunlight reflected from a stone, the smell of a road would make me stop 
still, to enjoy the special pleasure that each of them gave me, and also because 
they appeared to be concealing, beneath what my eyes could see, something 
which they invited me to approach and take from them, but which, despite all my 
efforts, I never managed to discover." Du Cote de chez Swann <(Paris, 1939), vol. 1, 
p. 256. >' — This passage shows very clearly how the old Romantic sentiment for 
landscape dissolves and a new Romantic conception of landscape emerges — of 
landscape that seems, rather, to be a cityscape, if it is true that the city is the 



properly sacred ground of flanerie. In this passage, at any rate, it would be 
presented as such for the first time since Baudelaire (whose work does not yet 
portray the arcades, though they were so numerous in his day) . [M2a,l] 

So the flaneur goes for a walk in his room: "When Johannes sometimes asked for 
permission to go out, it was usually denied him. But on occasion his father 
proposed, as a substitute, that they walk up and down the room hand in hand. 
This seemed at first a poor substitute, but in fact . . . something quite novel 
awaited him. The proposal was accepted, and it was left entirely to Johannes to 
decide where they should go. Off they went, then, right out the front entrance, 
out to a neighboring estate or to the seashore, or simply through the streets, 
exactly as Johannes could have wished; for his father managed everything. 
While they strolled in this way up and down the floor of his room, his father told 
him of all they saw. They greeted other pedestrians; passing wagons made a din 
around them and drowned out his father's voice; the comfits in the pastry shop 
were more inviting than ever." An early work by Kierkegaard, cited in Eduard 
Geismar, Siren Kierkegaard (Gottingen, 1929), pp. 12-13. Here is the key to the 
schema of Voyage autour de ma chambre* [M2a,2] 

"The manufacturer passes over the asphalt conscious of its quality; the old man 
searches it earefully, follows it just as long as he can, happily taps his cane so the 
wood resonates, and recalls with pride that he personally witnessed the laying of 
the first sidewalks; the poet . . . walks on it pensive and unconcerned, muttering 
lines of verse; the stockbroker hurries past, calculating the advantages of the last 
rise in wheat; and the madcap slides across." Alexis Martin, "Physiologie de l'as- 
phalte," he Boheme, 1, no. 3, (April 15, 1855) — Charles Pradier, editor in chief. 

[M2a,3] 

On the Parisians' technique of inhabiting their streets: "Returning by the Rue 
Saint-I lonore, we met with an eloquent example of that Parisian street industry 
which can make use of anything. Men were at work repairing the pavement and 
laying pipeline, and, as a residt, in the middle of the street there was an area 
which was blocked off but which was embanked and covered with stones. On 
this spot street vendors had immediately installed themselves, and five or six 
were selling writing implements and notebooks, cutlery, lampshades, garters, 
embroidered collars, and all sorts of trinkets. Even a dealer in secondhand goods 
had opened a branch office here and was displaying on the stones his bric-a-brac 
of old cups, plates, glasses, and so forth, so that business was profiting, instead of 
suffering, from the brief disturbance. They are simply wizards at making a 
virtue of necessity." Adolf Stahr, Nach fiinf Jahren (Oldenburg, 1857), vol. 1, 
p. 29." 

Seventy years later, I had the same experience at the corner of the Boulevard 
Saint-Germain and the Boulevard Raspail. Parisians make the street an interior. 

[M3,l] 



"It is wonderful that in Paris itself one can actually wander through countryside." 
Karl Gutzkow, Briefe aus Paris (Leipzig, 1842), vol. 1, p. 61. The other side of the 
motif is thus touched on. For if flanerie can transform Paris into one great 
interior — a house whose rooms are the quartiers, no less clearly demarcated by 
thresholds than are real rooms — then, on the other hand, the city can appear to 
someone walking through it to be without thresholds: a landscape in the round. 

[M3,2] 

But in the final analysis, only the revolution creates an open space for the city. 
Fresh air doctrine of revolutions. Revolution disenchants the city. Commune in 
L Education sentimentale. Image of the street in civil war. [M3,3] 

Street as domestic interior. Concerning the Passage du Pont-Neuf (between the 
Rue Guenegaud and the Rue de Seine): "the shops resemble closets." Nouveaux 
Tableaux de Paris, ou Observations sur les moeurs et usages des Parisiens au 
commencement du XI X e siecle (Paris, 1828), vol. 1, p. 34. [M3,4] 

The courtyard of the Tuileries: "immense savannah planted with lampposts in- 
stead of banana trees." Paul-Ernest de Rattier, Paris n'existe pas (Paris, 1857). 
D Gas D [M3,5] 



Passage Colhert: "The gas lamp illuminating it looks like a coconut palm in the 
middleof a savannah. "0 Gas D Le Livredes cent-et-un (Paris, 183.3), vol. 10, p. 57 
(Amedee Kermel, "Les Passages de Paris"). [M3,6] 

Lighting in the Passage Colbert: "I admire the regular series of those crystal 
globes, which give of f a light both vivid and gentle. Couldn't the same be said of 
comets in battle formation, awaiting the signal for departure to go vagabonding 
through space?" Le Livre des cent-et-un, vol. 10, p. 57. Compare this transforma- 
tion of the city into an astral world with Grandville's Un Autre Monde. □ Gas D 

[M3,7] 

In 1839 it was considered elegant to take a tortoise out walking. This gives us an 
idea of the tempo of flanerie in the arcades. [M3,8] 

Gustave Claudin is supposed to have said: "On the day when a filet ceases to be a 
filet and becomes a 'chateaubriand,' when a mutton stew is called an 'Irish stew,' 
or when the waiter cries out, ''Moniteur, clock!' to indicate that this newspaper was 
recjuested by the customer sitting under the clock — on that day, Paris will have 
been truly dethroned!" Jules Claretie, La Vie m Paris 1896 (Paris, 1897), p. 100. 

[M3,9] 



"There — on the Avenue des Champs-Elysees — it has stood since 1845: the 
Jardin d'Hiver, a colossal greenhouse with a great many rooms for social occa- 



sions, for balls and concerts, although, since its doors are open in summer too, it 
hardly deserves the name of winter garden." When the sphere of planning cre- 
ates such entanglements of closed room and airy nature, then it serves in this way 
to meet the deep human need for daydreaming — a propensity that perhaps 
proves the true efficacy of idleness in human affairs. Woldemar Seyffarth, Wahr- 
nehmungen in Paris 1853 und 1854 (Gotha, 1855), p. 130. [M3.10] 

The menu at Les Trois Freres Provencaux: "Thirty-six pages for food, four pages 
for drink — but very long pages, in small folio, with closely packed text and 
numerous aimotations in fine print." The booklet is bound in velvet. Twenty 
hors d'oeuvres and thirty-three soups. "Forty-six beef dishes, among which are 
seven different beefsteaks and eight filets." "Thirty-four preparations of game, 
forty-seven dishes of vegetables, and seventy-one varieties of compote." Julius 
Rodenberg, Paris bei Sonnenschein und Lampenlicht (Leipzig, 1867), pp. 43-44. 
Flanerie through the bill of fare. [M3a,l] 

The best way, while dreaming, to catch the afternoon in the net of evening is to 
make plans. The flaneur in planning. [M3a,2] 

"Le Corbusier's houses depend on neither spatial nor plastic articulation: the air 
passes through them! Air becomes a constitutive factor! What matters, therefore, 
is neither spatiality per se nor plasticity per se but only relation and interfusion. 
There is but one indivisible space. The integuments separating inside from outside 
fall away." Sigfried Giedion, Bauen in Frankreich <Berlin, 1928>, p. 85. [M3a,3] 

Streets are the dwelling place of the collective. The collective is an eternally 
unquiet, eternally agitated being that — in the space between the building fronts — 
experiences, learns, understands, and invents as much as individuals do within 
the privacy of their own four walls. For this collective, glossy enameled shop 
signs are a wall decoration as good as, if not better than, an oil painting in the 
drawing room of a bourgeois ; walls with their "Post No Bills" are its writing desk, 
newspaper stands its libraries, mailboxes its bronze busts, benches its bedroom 
furniture, and the cafe terrace is the balcony from which it looks down on its 
household. The section of railing where road workers hang their jackets is the 
vestibule, and the gateway which leads from the row of courtyards out into the 
open is the long corridor that daunts the bourgeois, being for the courtyards the 
entry to the chambers of the city. Among these latter, the arcade was the drawing 
room. More than anywhere else, the street reveals itself in the arcade as the 
furnished and familiar interior of the masses. [M3a,4] 

The intoxicated interpenetration of street and residence such as comes about in 
the Paris of the nineteenth century — and especially in the experience of the 
flaneur — has prophetic value. For the new architecture lets this interpenetration 
become sober reality. Giedion on occasion draws attention to this : "A detail of 



anonymous engineering, a grade crossing, becomes an element in the architec- 
ture" (that is, of a villa). S. Giedion, Bauen in Frankreich <Berlin, 1928>, p. 89. 

[M3a,5] 

"Hugo, in Les Miserables, has provided an amazing description of the Faubourg 
Saint-Marceau: 'It was no longer a place of solitude, for there were people passing; 
it was not the country, for there were houses and streets; it was not a city, for the 
streets had ruts in them, like the highways, and grass grew along their borders; it 
was not a village, for the houses were too lofty. What was it then? It was an 
inhabited place where there was nobody, it was a desert place where there was 
somebody, it was a boulevard of the great city, a street of Paris — wilder at night 
than a forest, and gloomier by day than a graveyard."" 0 <Lucien> Dubech and 
<Pierre> d'Espezel, Histoire de Paris (Paris, 1926), p. 366. [M3a,6] 

"The last horse-drawn omnibus made its final run on the Villette— Saint Sulpice 
line in January 1913; the last horse-drawn tram, on the Pantin-Opera line in April 
of the same year." Dubech and d'Espezel, Histoire de Paris, p. 463. [M3a,7] 

"On January 30, 1828, the fi rst omnibus began operation on the line running along 
the boulevard from the Bastille to the Madeleine. The fare was twenty-five or 
thirty centimes; the car stopped where one wished. It had eighteen to twenty seats, 
and its route was divided into two stages, with the Saint-Martin gate as midpoint. 
The vogue for this invention was extraordinary: in 1829, the company was run- 
ning fifteen lines, and rival companies were offering stiff competition — Tricycles, 
Ecossaises <Scots Women), Bearnaises <Gascon Women), Dames Blanches <Ladies 
in White). Dubech and d'Espezel, Histoire de Paris, p. 358-359. [M3a,8] 

"After an hour the gathering broke up, and for the first time I found the streets of 
Paris nearly deserted. On the boulevards I met only unaccompanied persons, and 
on the Rue Vivienne at Stock Market Square, where by day you have to wind your 
way through the crowd, there wasn't a soul. I could hear nothing but my own steps 
and the murmur of fountains where by day you cannot escape the deafening buzz. 
In the vicinity of the Palais Royal I encountered a patrol. The soldiers were ad- 
vancing single file along both sides of the street, close to the houses, at a distance of 
five or six paces from one another so as not to be attacked at the same time and so 
as to be able to render mutual aid. This reminded me that, at the very heginning of 
my stay here, I had been advised to proceed in this manner myself at night when 
with several others, hut, ii I had to go home alone, always to take a cah." Eduard 
Devi-ient, Briefe aus Paris (Berlin , 1840), p. 248. [M4,l] 

On the omnibuses. "The driver stops and you mount the few steps of the conven- 
ient little staircase and look about for a place in the car, where henches extend 
lengthwise on the right and the left, with room for up to sixteen people. You've 
hardly set foot in the car when it starts rolling again. The conductor has once more 
pulled the cord, and, with a quick movement that causes a hell to sound, he 



advances the needle on a transparent dial to indicate that another person has 
entered; by this means they keep track of receipts. Now that the car is moving, you 
reach calmly into your wallet and pay the fare. If you happen to be sitting reason- 
ably far from the conductor, the money travels from hand to hand among the 
passengers; the well-dressed lady takes it from the workingman in the blue jacket 
and passes it on. This is all accomplished easily, in routine fashion, and without 
any bother. When someone is to exit, the conductor again pulls the cord and brings 
the car to a halt. If it is going uphill — which in Paris it often is — and therefore is 
going more slowly, men will customarily climb on and off without the car's having 
to stop." Eduard Devrient, Briefe aus Paris (Berlin, 1840), p. 61-62. [M4,2] 

"It was after the Exhibition of 1867 that one began to see those velocipedes which, 
some years later, had a vogue as widespread as it was short-lived. We may recall 
that under the Directory certain Incroyables" could be seen riding velociferes, 
which were bulky, badly constructed velocipedes. On May 19, 1804, a play entitled 
Velociferes was performed at the Vaudeville; it contained a song with this verse: 

You , partisans of the gentle gait, 
Coachmen who have lost the spur, 
Would you now accelerate 
Beyond the prompt velocifere? 
Learn then how to substitute 
Dexterity for speed. 

By the beginning of 1868, however, velocipedes were in circulation, and soon the 
public walkways were everywhere furrowed. Velocemen replaced boatmen. There 
were gymnasia and arenas for velocipedists, and competitions were set up to chal- 
lenge the skill of amateurs. . . . Today the velocipede is finished and forgotten." 
H. Gourdon de Genouillac, Paris a travers les siecles (Paris, 1882), vol. 5, p. 288. 

[M4,3] 

The peculiar irresolution of the flaneur. Just as waiting seems to be the proper 
state of the impassive thinker, doubt appears to be that of the flaneur. An elegy by 
Schiller contains the phrase: "the hesitant wing of the butterfly." 12 This points to 
that association of wingedness with the feeling of indecision which is so charac- 
teristic of hashish intoxication. [M4a,l] 

E. T. A. Hoffmann as type of the flaneur; "Des Vetters Eckfenster" <My Cousin's 
Comer Window> is a testament to this. And thus Hoffmann's great success in 
France, where there has been a special understanding for this type. In the bio- 
graphical notes to the five-volume edition of his later writings (Brodhag?) , 13 we 
read: "Hoffmann was never really a friend of the great outdoors. What mattered 
to him more than anything else was the human being — communication with, 
observations about, the simple sight of, human beings. Whenever he went for a 
walk in summer, which in good weather happened every day toward evening, 



then . . . there was scarcely a tavern or pastry shop where he would not look in to 
see whether anyone — and, if so, who — might be there." [M4a,2] 



Menilmontant. "In this immense quartier where meager salaries doom women and 
children to eternal privation, the Rue de la Chine and those streets which join and 
cut across it, such as the Rue des Partants and that amazing Rue Orfi la, so fantas- 
tic with its roundabouts and its sudden turns, its fences of uneven wood slats, its 
uninhabited summerhouses, its deserted gardens reclaimed by nature where wild 
shrubs and weeds are growing, sound a note of appeasement and of rare calm. . . . 
It is a country path under an open sky where most of the people who pass seem to 
have eaten and drunk." J.-K. Huysmans, Croquis Parisiens (Paris, 1886), p. 95 
("La Rue de la Chine"). [M4a,3] 

Dickens. "In his letters ... he complains repeatedly when traveling, even in the 
mountains of Switzerland, . . . about the lack of street noise, which was indispen- 
sable to him for his writing. 'I can't express how much I want these [streets],' he 
wrote in 1846 from Lausanne, where he was working on one of his greatest novels, 
Dombey and Son. 'It seems as if they supplied something to my brain, which it 
cannot hear, when busy, to lose. For a week or a fortnight I can write prodigiously 
in a retired place . . . and a day in London sets me up again and starts me. But the 
toil and labor of writing, day after day, without that magic lantern, is im- 
mense. . . . My figures seem disposed to stagnate without crowds ahout them. . . . 
In Genoa ... I had two miles of streets at least, lighted at night, to walk ahout in; 
and a great theater to repair to, every night.'"' 1 <Franz Mehring,) "Charles Dick- 
ens," Die neue Zeit, 30, no. 1 (Stuttgart, 1912), pp. 621-622. [M4a,4] 

Brief description of misery; probahly under thehridges of the Seine. "Abohemian 
woman sleeps, her head tilted forward, her empty purse hetween her legs. Her 
blouse is covered with pins that glitter in the sun, and the few appurtenances of her 
household and toilette — two brushes, an open knife, a closed tin — are so well 
arranged that this semblance of order creates almost an air of intimacy, the 
shadow of an interieur, around her." Marcel Jouhandeau, Images de Paris (Paris 
<1934>), p. 62. [M5,l] 

"<Baudelaire's> 'Le Beau Navire' <The Good Ship> created quite a stir. . . . It was 
the cue for a whole series of sailor songs, which seemed to have transformed the 
Parisians into mariners and inspired them with dreams of boating. ... In wealthy 
Venice where luxury shines, / Where golden porticoes glimmer in the water, / 
Where palaces of glorious marble reveal / Masterworks of art and treasures di- 
vine, / I have only my gondola, / Sprightly as a bird / That darts and flies at its 
ease, / Skimming the surface of the waters." H. Gourdon de Genouillac, Les Re- 
frains de la rue, de 1830 a 1870 (Paris, 1879), pp. 21-22. [M5,2] 

'"Tell me, what is that awful stew which smells so had and is warming in that great 
pot?' says a provincial sort to an old porter. 'That, my dear sir, is a hatch of 



paving stones that are being baked to pave our poor boulevard, which is looking so 
worn! ... As if strolling wasn't nicer when you walked on the soil, the way you do 
in a garden!" La Grande Ville: Nouveau Tableau de Paris (Paris, 1844), vol. 1, 
p.334("LeBitume"). [M5,3] 

On the first omnibuses: "Competition has already emerged in the form of 'Les 
Dames Blanches.' . . . These cars are painted entirely in white, and the drivers, 
dressed in . . . white, operate a bellows with their foot that plays the tune from La 
Dame Blanche: 'The lady in white is looking at you . . .'" Nadar, Quand fetais 
photographe (Paris <1900>), pp. 301-302 ("1830 et environs"). [M5,4] 

Musset once named the section of the boulevards that lies behind the Theatre des 
Varietes, and that is not much frequented by flaneurs, the East Indies. <See 
Mlla,3.> [M5,5] 

The flaneur is the observer of the marketplace. His knowledge is akin to the 
occult science of industrial fluctuations. He is a spy for the capitalists, on assign- 
ment in the realm of consumers. [M5,6] 

The flaneur and the masses: here Baudelaire's "Reve parisien" might prove very 
instructive. [M5,7] 

The idleness of the flaneur is a demonstration against the division of labor. 

[M5,8] 

Asphalt was first used for sidewalks. [M5,9] 

"A town, such as London, where a man may wander for hours together without 
reaching the beginning of the end, without meeting the slightest hint which could 
lead to the inference that there is open country within reach, is a strange thing. 
This colossal centralization, this heaping together of two and a half millions of 
human beings at one point, has multiplied the power of this two and a half millions 
a hundredfold; has raised London to the commercial capital of the world, created 
the giant docks and assembled the thousand vessels that continually cover the 
Thames. . . . But the sacrifices which all this has cost become apparent later. After 
roaming the streets of the capital a day or two, . . . one realizes for the first time 
that these Londoners have been forced to sacrifice the best qualities of their hu- 
man nature to bring to pass all the marvels of civilization. . . . The very turmoil of 
the streets has something repulsive about it — something against which human na- 
ture rebels. The hundreds of thousands of all classes and ranks crowding past 
each other — aren't they all human beings with the same qualities and powers, and 
with the same interest in being happy? And aren't they obliged, in t he end, to seek 
happiness in the same way, by the same means? And still they crowd by one 
another as though they had nothing in common, nothing to do with one another, 
and their only agreement is the tacit one — that each keep to his own side of the 



pavement, so as not to delay the opposing streams of the crowd — while no man 
thinks to honor another with so much as a glance. The brutal indifference, the 
unfeeling isolation of each in his private interest becomes the more repellent and 
offensive, the more these individuals are crowded together within a limited space. 
And however much one may be aware that this isolation of the individual, this 
narrow self -seeking, is the fundamental principle of our society everywhere, it is 
nowhere so shamelessly barefaced, so self-conscious, as just here in the crowding 
of the great city." Friedrich Engels, Die Lage der arbeitenden Klasse in England, 
2nd ed. (Leipzig, 1848), pp. 36-37 ("Die grossen Stadte"). 13 [M5a,l] 

"By 'bohemians' I mean that class of individuals for whom existence is a problem, 
circumstances a myth, and fortune an enigma; who have no sort of fixed abode, no 
place of refuge; who belong nowhere and are met with everywhere; who have no 
particular calling in life but follow fifty professions; who, for the most part, arise 
in the morningwithout knowing where they are to dine in the evening; who are rich 
today, impoverished tomorrow; who are ready to live honestly if they can, and 
otherwise if they cannot." Adolphed'Ennery and Grange, Les Bohemiens de Paris 
<A play in five acts and eight tableaux> (Paris), pp. 8-9 (L'Ambigu-Comique, Sep- 
tember 27, 1843; series entitled Magasin theatral). 

[M5a,2] 

"Then from out of Saint Martin's Gate / The romantic Omnibus Hashed by." 
[Leon Gozlan,] Le Triomphe des Omnibus: Poeme heroi-comique (Paris, 1828), 
p. 15. [M6,l] 

"When the first German railway line was about to be constructed in Bavaria, the 
medical faculty at Erlangen published an expert opinion . . . : the rapid movement 
would cause . . . cerebral disorders (the mere sight of a train rushing by could 
already do this), and it was therefore necessary, at the least, to build a wooden 
barrier five feet high on both sides of the track." Egon Friedell, Kidturgeschichte 
derNeuzeit (Munich, 1931), vol. 3, p. 91. [M6,2] 

"Beginning around 1845 . . . there were railroads and steamers in all parts of 
Europe, and the new means of transport were celebrated. . . . Pictures, letters, 
stories of travel were the preferred genre for authors and readers." Egon Friedell, 
Kidturgeschichte der Neuzeit (Munich, 1931), vol. 3, p. 92. [M6,3] 

The following observation typifies the concerns of the age: "When one is sailing 
on a river or lake, one's body is without active movement. . . . The skin experi- 
ences no contraction, and its pores remain wide open and capable of absorbing 
all the emanations and vapors of the surrounding environment. The blood . . . 
remains . . . concentrated in the cavities of the chest and abdomen, and reaches 
the extremities with difficulty." J.-F. Dancel, De I'lnfluence des voyages sur I'homme 
et sur ses maladies: Ouvrage specialement destine aux gens du monde (Paris, 1846), 
p. 92 ("Des Promenades en bateau sur les lacs et les rivieres"). [M6,4] 



Remarkable distinction between flanenr and rubberneck (badaud): "Let us not, 
however, confuse the flaneur with the rubberneck: there is a subtle difference. . . . 
The average flaneur ... is always in full possession of his individuality, while that 
of the rubberneck disappears, absorbed by the external world, . . . which moves 
him to the point of intoxication and ecstasy. Under the influence of the spectacle, 
the rubberneck becomes an impersonal being. He is no longer a man — he is the 
public; he is the crowd. At a distance from nature, his naive soul aglow, ever 
inclined to reverie, . . . the true rubberneck deserves the admiration of all upright 
and sincere hearts." Victor Fournel, Ce qu'on voit dans les rues de Paris (Paris, 
1858), p. 263 ("L'Odyssee d'un flaneur dans les rues de Paris"). [M6,5] 

The phantasmagoria of the flaneur: to read from faces the profession, the ances- 
try, the character. [M6,6] 

In 1851 lf) there was still a regular stagecoach line between Paris and Venice. 

[M6.7] 



On the colportage phenomenon of space: '"The sense of mystery,' wrote Odilon 
Redon, who had learned the secret from da Vinci, 'comes from remaining always 
in the equivocal, with double and triple perspectives, or inklings of perspective 
(images within images) — forms that take shape and come into being according to 
the state of mind of the spectator. All things more suggestive just because they do 
appear.'" Cited in Raymond Escholier, "Artiste," Arts et metiers graphiques, No. 
47 (June 1, 1935), p. 7. [M6a,l] 

The flaneur at night. "Tomorrow, perhaps, . , . noctambulism will have had its 
day. Rut at least it will be lived to the full during the thirty or forty years it will 
last. . . . The individual can rest from time to time; stopping places and waysta- 
tions are permitted him. Rut he does not have the right to sleep." Alfred Delvau, 
Les Heures parisiennes (Paris, 1866), pp. 200, 206 ("Deux Heures de matin"). — 
That nightlife was significantly extended is evident already from the fact that, as 
Delvau recounts (p. 163), the stores were closing at ten o'clock. [M6a,2] 

In the musical revue by Rarre, Radet, and Desfontaines, M. Durelief, ou Petite 
Revue des embellissemens de Paris (Paris, 1810), performed at the Theatre de 
Vaudeville on June 9, 1810, Paris in the form of a model constructed by M. Dure- 
lief has migrated into the scenery. The chorus declares "how agreeahle it is to have 
all of Paris in one's drawing room" (p. 20). The plot revolves around a wager 
hetween the architect Durelief and the painter Ferdinand; if the former, in his 
model of Paris, omits any sort of "emhellishment," then his daughter Victorine 
straightaway helongs to Ferdinand, who otherwise has to wait two years for her. It 
turns out that Durelief has forgotten Her Majesty the Empress Marie Louise, "the 
most beautiful ornament" of Paris . [M6a,3] 



The city is the realization of that ancient dream of humanity, the labyrinth. It is 
this reality to which the flaneur, without knowing it, devotes himself. Without 



knowing it; yet nothing is more foolish than the conventional thesis which ration- 
alizes bis behavior, and which f onns the uncontested basis of that voluminous 
literature that traces the figure and demeanor of the flaneur — the thesis, namely, 
that the flaneur has made a study of the physiognomic appearance of people in 
order to discover their nationality and social station, character and destiny, from 
a perusal of their gait, build, and play of features. The interest in concealing the 
true motives of the flaneur must have been pressing indeed to have occasioned 
such a shabby thesis. [M6a,4] 

In Maxime Du Camp's poem "Le Voyageur," the flaneur wears the costume of 
the traveler: 

"I am afraid to stop — it's the engine of my life; 



Love galls me so; I do not want to love." 
"Move on then, on with your bitter travels! 
The sad road awaits you: meet your fate." 

Maxime Du Camp, Les Chants moderixes (Paris, 1855), p. 104. [M7,l] 

Lithograph. Cabmen Doing Battle with Omnibus Drivers. Cabinet des Estampes. 

[M7,2] 



As early as 1853, there are official statistics concerning vehicular traffic at certain 
Parisian nerve centers. "In 1853, thirty-one omnibus lines were serving Paris, and 
it is worth noting that, with a few exceptions, these lines were designated by the 
same letters used for the autobus lines operating at that time. Thus it was that the 
'Madeleine-Bastille' line was already Line E." Paul d'Ariste, La Vie et le monde 
du boulevard, 1830-1870 (Paris <1930>), p. 196. [M7,3] 

At connecting stations for the omnibus, passengers were called up in numerical 
order and had to answer when called if they wanted to preserve their right to a 
seat. (1855) [M7,4] 

"The absinthe hour . . . dates from the burgeoning ... of the small press. In 
earlier times, when there was nothing but large serious newspapers, . . . there was 
no absinthe hour. This heure de Vabsinthe is the logical consequence of the Pari- 
sian gossip columns and tabloids." Gabriel Guillemot, Le Boheme (Paris, 1869), 
p. 72 ("Physiognomies parisie.nnes"). [M7,5] 

Louis Lurine, Le Treizieme Arrondusement de Paris (Paris, 1850), is one of the most 
noteworthy testimonials to the distinctive physiognomy of the neighborhood. 
The book has certain stylistic peculiarities. It personifies the quartier. Formulas 
like "The thirteenth arrandissement devotes itself to a man's love only when it can 
furnish him with vices to love" (p. 216) are not unusual. 57 [M7,6] 



Diderot's "How beautiful the street!" is a favorite phrase of the chroniclers of co 
flanerie. [M7,7] 



Regarding the legend of the flaneur: "With the aid of a word I overhear in passing, 
I reconstruct an entire conversation, an entire existence. The inflection of a voice 
suffices for me to attach the name of a deadly sin to the man whom I have just 
jostled and whose profile I glimpsed." Victor Fournel, Ce qu'on voit dans les rues 
de Pans (Paris, 1858), p. 270. [M7,8] 

In 1857 there was still a coach departing from the Rue Pavee-Saint-Andre at 6 a.m. 
for Venice; the trip took six weeks. See Fournel, Ce qu'on voit dans les rues de 
Paris (Paris), p. 273. [M7,9] 

In omnibuses, a dial that indicated the number of passengers. Why? Asa control 
for the conductor who distributed the tickets. [M7.10] 

"It is worth remarking . . . that the omnibus seems to subdue and to still all who 
approach it. Those who make their living from travelers . . . can he recognized 
ordinarily hy their coarse rowdiness . . . , hut omnihus employees, virtually alone 
among transit workers, display no trace of such behavior. It seems as though a 
calming, drowsy influence emanates from this heavy machine, like that which 
sends marmots and turtles to sleep at the onset of winter." Victor Fournel, Ce 
qu'on voit dans les rues de Paris (Paris, 1858), p. 283 ("Cochers de fiacres, 
cochers de remise et cochers d'omnibus"). [M7a,l] 

"At the time Eugene Sue's Mysteres de Paris was published, no one, in certain 
neighborhoods of the capital, doubted the existence of a Tortillard, a Chouette, a 
Prince Rodolphe." Charles Louandre, Les I dees subversives de notre temps 
(Paris, 1872), p. 44. [M7a,2] 

The first proposal for an omnibus system came from Pascal and was realized 
under Louis XIV, with the characteristic restriction "that soldiers, pages, foot- 
men, and other livery, including laborers and hired hands, were not permitted 
entry into stiid coaches." In 1828, introduction of the omnibuses, about which a 
poster tells us: "These vehicles . . . warn of their approach by sounding specially 
designed horns." Eugene d'Auriac, Histoire anecdotique de I Industrie f ranqaise 
(Paris, 1861), pp. 250, 281. [M7a,3] 

Among the phantoms of the city is "Lambert" — an invented figure, a flaneur 
perhaps. In any case, he is allotted the boulevard as the scene of his apparitions. 
There is a famous couplet with the refrain, "Eh, Lambert!" Delvau, in his Lions 
du jour <Paris, 1867>, devotes a paragraph to him (p. 228). [M7a,4] 



3 



A rustic figure in the urban scene is described by Delvau in his chapter "Le 
Pauvre a cheval" <Poor Man on Horseback>, in Les Lions du jour. "This horseman 



was a poor devil whose means forbade his going on foot, and who asked for alms 
as another man might ask for directions. . . . This mendicant ... on his little nag, 
with its wild mane and its shaggy coat like that of a rural donkey, has long 
remained before my eyes and in my imagination. . . . He died — a rentier." Alfred 
Delvau, Les Lions du jour (Paris, 1867), pp. 116-117 ("Le Pauvre a cheval"). 

[M7a,5] 

Looking to accentuate the Parisians' new feeling for nature, which rises above 
gastronomical temptations, Rattier writes: "A pheasant, displaying itself at the 
door of its leafy dwelling, would make its gold-and-ruby plumage sparkle in the 
sunlight . . . , so as to greet visitors . . . like a nabob of the forest." Paul-Ernest de 
Rattier, Paris n 'existepas (Paris, 1857), pp. 71-72. □ Grandville D [M7a,6] 

"It is emphatically not the counterfeit Paris that will have produced the rubber- 
neck. ... As for the flaneur, who was always — on the sidewalks and before the 
display windows — a man of no account, a nonentity addicted to charlatans and 
ten-cent emotions, a stranger to all that was not cobblestone, cab, or gas lamp, . . . 
he has become a laborer, a wine grower, a manufacturer of wool, sugar, and iron. 
He is no longer dumbfounded at nature's ways. The germination of a plant no 
longer seems to him external to the factory methods used in the Faubourg Saint- 
Denis." Paul-Ernest de Rattier, Paris n'existe pas (Paris, 1857), pp. 74—75. 

[M8,l] 

In his pamphlet Le Steele maudit (Paris, 1843), which takes a stand against the 
corruption of contemporary society, Alexis Dumesnil makes use of a fiction of 
Juvenal's: the crowd on the boulevard suddenly stops still, and a record of each 
individual's thoughts and objectives at that particular moment is compiled 
(pp. 103-104). [M8,2] 

"The contradiction between town and country ... is the crassest expression of the 
subjection of the individual to the division of labor, to a specific activity forced 
upon him — a subjection that makes one man into a narrow-minded city animal, 
another into a narrow-minded country animal." <Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, 
Die deutsche Ideologie> in Marx-Engels Archiv, vol. 1, ed. D. Rjazanov (Frank- 
furt am Main <1928>), pp. 271-272. lu [M8,3] 

At the Arc de Triomphe: "Ceaselessly up and down these streets parade the cabri- 
olets, omnibuses, swallows, velociferes, citadines, dames blanches, and all the 
other public conveyances, whatever they may be called — not to mention the innu- 
merable whiskies, berlins, barouches, horsemen, and horsewomen." L. Rellstab, 
Paris im Friihjahr 1843 (Leipzig, 1844), vol. 1, p. 212. The author also mentions 
an omnihus that carried its destination written on a flag. [M8,4] 



Around 1857 (see H. de Pene, Paris intime [Paris, 1859], p. 224), the upper level 
of the omnibus was closed to women. [M8,5] 



-Jltibtzi' U'ltliuies an WiKompM par»tR,c'csl pas pave ! 

A Paris omnibus. Lithograph by Honore 1 Daumier, 1856. 'Hie caption reads: "Fifteen 
centimes for a full bath! My word, what a bargain!" See M8,5. 

"The genial Vautrin, disguised as the abbe Carlos Herrera, had foreseen the Pari- 
sians' infatuation with public transport when he invested all his funds in transit 
companies in order to settle a dowry on Lucien de Ruhempre." Poete, Beaure- 
paire, Clouzot, and Henriot, line Promenm.de a tr avers Paris au temps des ro- 
mantiques: Exposition de la Bibliotheque et des Travaux historiques de la VUte de 
Paris (1908), p. 28. [M8,6] 



"Therefore the one who sees, without hearing, is much more . . . worried than 
the one who hears without seeing. This principle is of great importance in under- 
standing the sociology of the modern city. Social life in the large city . . . shows a 
great preponderance of occasions to see rather than to hear people. One explana- 
tion ... of special significance is the development of public means of transporta- 
tion. Before the appearance of omnibuses, railroads, and streetcars in the 
nineteenth century, men were not in a situation where, for minutes or hours at a 
time, they could or must look at one another without talking to one another." 
G. Simmel, Melanges de philosophie relativiste: Contribution a la culture philoso- 
phique <trans. Alix Guillain> (Paris, 1912), pp. 26-27 ("Essai sur la sociologie des 
sens"). 19 The state of affairs which Simmel relates to the condition of uneasiness 
and lability has, in other respects, a certain part to play in the vulgar physiog- 



nomy. The difference between this physiognomy and that of the eighteenth 
century deserves study. [M8a,l] 



"Paris . . . dresses up a ghost in old numbers of he Constitutionnel, and produces 
Chodruc Duclos." Victor Hugo, Oeuvres completes, novels, vol. 7 (Paris, 1881), 
p. 32 (Les Miserables, ch. 3). 2 " [M8a,2] 

On Victor Hugo: "The morning, for him, was consecrated to sedentary lahors, the 
afternoon to labors of wandering. He adored the upper levels of omnibuses — those 
'traveling balconies,' as he called them — from which he could study at his leisure 
the various aspects of the gigantic city. He claimed that the deafening brouhaha of 
Paris produced in him the same effect as the sea." Edouard Drumont, Figures de 
bronze ou statues de neige (Paris <1900>), p. 25 ("Victor Hugo"). [M8a,3] 

Separate existence of each quartier: around the middle of the century it was still 
being said of the He Saint-Louis that if a girl there lacked a good reputation, she 
had to seek her future husband outside the district. [M8a,4] 

"0 night! 0 refreshing darkness! ... in the stony labyrinths of the metropolis, 
scintillation of stars, bright bursts of city lights, you are the fireworks of the 
goddess Liberty!" Charles Baudelaire, he Spleen de Paris, ed. Hilsum (Paris), 
p. 203 ("Le Crepuscule du soir"). 21 [M8a,5] 

Names of omnibuses around 1840, in Gaetan Niepovie, Etudes physiologiques sill- 
ies grandes metropoles de VEurope occidentale (Paris, 1840), p. 113: Parisiennes, 
Hirondelles <Swallows>, Citadines, Vigilantes <Guardianesses>, Aglaias, Deltas. 

[M8a,6] 

Paris as landscape spread out below the painters: "As you cross the Rue Notre- 
Dame-de-Lorette, lift up your head and direct your gaze at one of those platforms 
crowning the Italianate houses. You cannot fail to notice, etched against the sky 
seven stories above the level of the pavements, something resembling a scarecrow 
stuck out in a field. . . . At first you see a dressing gown upon which all the colors of 
the rainbow are blended without harmony, a pair of long trousers of outlandish 
shape, and slippers impossible to describe. Under this burlesque apparel hides a 
young painter." Paris chez soi (Paris <1854.>), pp. 191-192 (Alberic Second, "Rue 
Notre-Dame-de-Lorette"). [M9,l] 

Geffroy, under the impression made by the works of Meryon: "These are repre- 
sented things which give to the viewer the possibility of dreaming them. " Gustave 
Geffroy, Charles Meryon (Paris, 1926), p. 4. [M9,2] 

"The omnibus — that Leviathan of coachwork — crisscrosses with all the many car- 
riages at the speed of lightning!" Theophile Gautier [in Edouard Fournier, Paris 
demoli, 2nd ed., with a preface by M. Theophile Gautier (Paris, 1855), p. iv]. 



(This preface appeared — presumably as a review of the first edition — in he 
Moniteur universel of January 21, 1854. It would appear to be wholly or in part 
identical to Gautier's "Mosa'ique de mines," in Paris et les Parisiens au XIX" siecle 
[Paris, 1856].) [M9.3] 

"The most heterogeneous temporal elements thus coexist in the city. If we step 
from an eighteenth-century house into one from the sixteenth century, we tumble 
down the slope of time. Right next door stands a Gothic church, and we sink to the 
depths. A few steps farther, we are in a street from out of the early years of 
Bismarck's rule . . . , and once again climbing the mountain of time. Whoever sets 
foot in a city feels caught up as in a web of dreams, where the most remote past is 
linked to the events of today. One house allies with another, no matter what period 
they come from, and a street is horn. And then insofar as this street, which may go 
hack to the age of Goethe, runs into another, which may date from the Wilhelmine 
years, the district emerges. . . . The climactic points of the city are its squares: 
here, from every direction, converge not only numerous streets but all the streams 
of their history. No sooner have they flowed in than they are contained; the edges 
of the square serve as quays, so that already the outward form of the square 
provides information about the history that was played upon it. . . . Things which 
find no expression in political events, or find only minimal expression, unfold in 
the cities: they are a superfine instrument, responsive as an Aeolian harp — despite 
their specific gravity — to the living historic vibrations of the air." Ferdinand Lion, 
Geschichte biologisch gesehen (Ziirich and Leipzig <1935>), pp. 125-126, 128 
("Notiz iiber Stadte"). [M9,4] 

Delvau believes he can recognize the social strata of Parisian society in flanerie as 
easily as a geologist recognizes geological strata. [M9a,l] 

The man of letters: "The most poignant realities for him are not spectacles but 
studies." Alfred Delvau, Les Dessous de Paris (Paris, 1860), p. 121. [M9a,2] 

"A man who goes for a walkought not to have to concern himself with any hazards 
he may run into or with the regulations of a city. If an amusing idea enters his 
head, if a curious shopfront comes into view, it is natural that he would want to 
cross the street without confronting dangers such as our grandparents could not 
have imagined. But he cannot do this today without taking a hundred precautions, 
without checking the horizon, without asking the advice of the police department, 
without mixing with a dazed and breathless herd, for whom the way is marked out 
in advance by hits of shining metal. If he tries to collect the whimsical thoughts 
that may have come to mind, very possihly occasioned by sights on the street, he is 
deafened by car horns, stupefied by loud talkers . . . , and demoralized by the 
scraps of conversation, of political meetings, of jazz, which escape slyly from the 
windows. In former times, moreover, his brothers, the rubbernecks, who ambled 
along so easily down the sidewalks and stopped a moment everywhere, lent to the 
stream of humanity a gentleness and a tranquillity which it has lost. Now it is a 



torrent where you are rolled, buffeted, cast up, and swept to one side and the 
other." Edmond Jaloux, "Le Dernier Flaneur," Le Temps (May 22, 1936). 

[M9a,3] 



"To leave without being forced in any way, and to follow your inspiration as if the 
mere fact of turning right or turning left already constituted an essentially poetic 
act." Edmond Jaloux, "Le Dernier Flaneur," Le Temps (May 22, 1936). [M9a,4] 

"Dickens . . . could not remain in Lausanne because, in order to write his novels, 
he needed the immense labyrinth of London streets where he could prowl about 
continuously. . . . Thomas De Quincey . . . , as Baudelaire tells us, was 'a sort of 
peripatetic, a street philosopher pondering his way endlessly through the vortex of 
the great city.'" 22 Edmond Jaloux, "Le Dernier Flaneur," Le Temps (May 22, 
1936). [M9a,5] 

"Taylor's obsession, and that of his collaborators and successors, is the 'war on 
flanerie.'" Georges Friedmann, La Crise du progres (Paris <1936>), p. 76. 

[M10.1] 

The urban in Balzac: "Nature appears to him in its magical aspect as the arcanum 
of matter. It appears to him in its symbolic aspect as the reverberation of human 
energies and aspirations: in the crashing of the ocean's waves, he experiences the 
'exaltation of human forces'; and in the show of color and fragrance produced by 
flowers, he reads the cipher of love's longing. Always, for him, nature signifies 
something other, an intimation of spirit. The opposite movement he does not rec- 
ognize: the immersion of the human back into nature, the saving accord with stars, 
clouds, winds. He was far too engrossed by the tensions of human existence." 
Ernst Robert Curtius, Balzac (Bonn, 1923), pp. 468-469. [M10.2] 

"Balzac lived a life ... of furious haste and premature collapse, a life such as that 
imposed on the inhabitants of hig cities by the struggle for existence in modern 
society. ... In Balzac's case we see, for the first time, a genius who shares such a 
life and lives it as his own." Ernst Rohert Curtius, Balzac (Bonn, 1923), pp. 464— 
465. On the question of tempo, compare the following: "Poetry and art . . . derive 
from a 'quick inspection of things.' ... In Seraphita, velocity is introduced as an 
essential feature of artistic intuition: "that 'mind's eye' whose rapid perception 
can engender within the soul, as on a canvas, the most diverse landscapes of the 
world." 2 ' Ernst Robert Curtins, Balzac (Bonn, 1923), p. 445. [M10.3] 

"If God . . . has imprinted every man's destiny in his physiognomy, . . . why 
shouldn't the human hand sum up that physiognomy in itself, since the hand 
comprises human action in its entirety and is its sole means of manifestation? 
Hence palmistry. . . . To foretell the events of a man's life from the study of his 
hand is a feat ... no more extraordinary than telling a soldier he is going to fight, 
a barrister that he is going to plead a cause, a cobbler that he is going to make 



boots or shoes, a farmer that he is going to fertilize and plough his land. Let us take 
a still more striking example: genius is a sort of immaterial sun whose rays give 
color to everything passing by. Cannot an idiot be immediately recognized by 
characteristics which are the opposite of those shown by a man of genius? . . . Most 
observant people, students of social nature in Paris, are able to tell the profession 
of a passerby as they see him approach." Honore de Balzac, he Cousin Pons, in 
Oeuvres completes, vol. 18, Scenes de la vie parisienne, 6 (Paris, 1914), p. 130. 24 

[M10,4] 

"What men call love is very small, very restricted, and very weak compared with 
this ineffable orgy, this holy prostitution of the soul which gives itself entirely, 
poetry and charity, to the unforeseen that reveals itself, to the unknown that 
happens along." Charles Baudelaire, he Spleen de Paris, ed. R. Simon, p. 16 
("Les Foules"). 25 [Ml0a,l] 

"Which of us, in his moments of ambition, has not dreamed of the miracle of a 
poetic prose, musical, without rhythm and without rhyme, supple enough and 
rugged enough to adapt itself to the lyrical impulses of the soul, the undulations of 
reverie, the jibes of conscience? / It was, above all, out of my exploration of huge 
cities, out of the medley of their innumerable interrelations, that this haunting 
ideal was born." Charles Baudelaire, he Spleen de Pmris, ed. R. Simon, pp. 1-2 
("A Arsene Houssaye"). 26 [Ml0a,2] 

"There is nothing more profound, more mysterious, more pregnant, more insidi- 
ous, more dazzling than a window lighted by a single candle." Charles Baudelaire, 
Le Spleen de Paris, ed. R. Simon (Paris), p. 62 ("Les Fenetres"). 27 [Ml0a,3] 

"The artist seeks eternal truth and knows nothing of the eternity in his midst. He 
admires the column of the Babylonian temple and scorns the smokestack on the 
factory. Yet what is the difference in their lines? When the era of coal-powered 
industry is over, people will admire the vestiges of the last smokestacks, as today 
we admire the remains of temple columns. . . . The steam vapor so detested by 
writers allows them to divert their admiration. . . . Instead of waiting to visit the 
Bay of Bengal to find objects to exclaim over, they might have a little curiosity 
about the objects they see in daily life. A porter at the Gare de l'Est is no less 
picturesque than a coolie in Colombo. ... To walk out your front door as if you've 
just arrived from a foreign country; to discover the world in which you already 
live; to begin the day as if you've just gotten off the boat from Singapore and have 
never seen your own doormat or the people on the landing . . . — it is this that 
reveals the humanity before you, unknown until now." Pierre Hamp, "La Littera- 
ture, image de la societe" (Encyclopedic franqaise, vol. 16, Arts et litteratures 
dans Im. societe contemporaine, 1, p. 64). [Ml0a,4] 



Chesterton fastens on a specimen of English argot to characterize Dickens in his 
relation to the street: "He has the key to the street" is said of someone to whom the 



door is closed. "Dickens himself had, in the most sacred and serious sense of the 
term, the key to the street. . . . His earth was the stones of the street; his stars were 
the lamps of the street; his hero was the man in the street. He could open the 
inmost door of his house — the door that leads into that secret passage which is 
lined with houses and roofed with stars." G. K. Chesterton, Dickens, series enti- 
tled Vies des hommes illustres, vol. 9, translated from the English by Laurent and 
Martin-Dupont (Paris, 1927), p. 30. 2,i (Ml 1 , 1 ] 

Dickens a s a child : "Whenever he had done drudging, h e had n o other resource but 
drifting, and he drifted over half London. He was a dreamy child, thinking mostly 
of his own dreary prospects. . . . He did not go in for 'observation,' a priggish 
habit; he did not look at Charing Cross to improve his mind or count the lamp- 
posts in Holborn to practice his arithmetic. But unconsciously he made all these 
places the scenes of the monstrous drama in his miserable little soul. He walked in 
darkness under the lamps of Holborn, and was crucified at Charing Cross. So for 
him ever afterwards these places had the beauty that only belongs to battlefields." 
G. K. Chesterton, Dickens, series entitled Vie des hommes illustres, vol. 9, trans- 
lated from the English by Laurent and Martin-Dupont (Paris, 1927), pp. 30-31. 29 

[M11.2] 



On the psychology of the flaneur: "The undying scenes we can all see if we shut our 
eyes are not the scenes that we have stared at under the direction of guide-books; 
the scenes we see are the scenes at which we did not look at all — the scenes in which 
we walked when we were thinking about something else — about a sin, or a love 
affair, or some childish sorrow. We can see the background now because we did not 
see it then. So Dickens did not stamp these places on his mind; he stamped his 
mind on these places." G. K. Chesterton, Dickens, series entitled Vie des hommes 
illustres, vol. 9, translated from the English by Laurent and Martin-Dupont 
(Paris, 1927), p. 31. 30 [Ml 1,3] 



Dickens: "In May of 1846 he ran over to Switzerland and tried to write Dombey 
and Son at Lausanne. . . . He could not get on. He attributed this especially to his 
love of London and his loss of it, 'the absence of streets and numbers of 
figures. . . . My figures seem disposed to stagnate without crowds about them.'" 
G. K. Chesterton, Dickens, translated from the English by Laurent and Martin- 
Dupont (Paris, 1927), p. 125." [Mlla.11 

"In . . . he Voyage de MM. Dunanan pere et fils, two provincials are deceived into 
thinking that Paris is not Paris but Venice, which they had set out to visit. . . . 
Paris as an intoxication of all the senses, as a place of delirium." S. Kracauer, 
Jacques Offenbach unci das Paris seiner Zeit (Amsterdam, 1937), p. 283. 32 

[Mlla,2] 



According to a remark by Musset, the "East Indies" begin at a point beyond the 
boundary of the boulevards. (Shouldn't it be called instead the Far East?) (See 
Kracauer, Offenbach, p. 105.) 33 [Mlla,3] 



Kracauer writes that "the boulevardiers . . . eschewed nature. . . . Nature was as 
Plutonic, as volcanic, as the people." S. Kracauer, Jacques Offenbach (Amster- 
dam, 1937), p. 107. :i4 [Mlla,4] 



On the detective novel: "We must take as an established fact that this metamor- 
phosis of the city is due to a transposition of the setting — namely, from the savan- 
nah and forest of Fenimore Cooper, where every broken branch signifies a worry 
or a hope, where every tree trunk hides an enemy rifle or the bow of an invisible 
and silent avenger. Beginning with Balzac, all writers have clearly recorded this 
debt and faithfully rendered to Cooper what they owed him. Works like Les Mohi- 
cans de Paris, by Alexander Dumas — works where the title says all — are ex- 
tremely common." Roger Caillois, "Paris, mythe moderne," Nouvelle Revue 
francaise, 25, no. 284 (May 1, 1937), pp. 685-686. [Mlla,5] 

Owing to the influence of Cooper, it becomes possible for the novelist in an 
urban setting to give scope to the experiences of the hunter. Tliis has a bearing on 
the rise of the detective story. [Mlla,6] 

"It seems reasonable to say that there exists ... a phantasmagorical repre- 
sentation of Paris (and, more generally, of the big city) with such power over the 
imagination that the question of its accuracy would never be posed in practice — a 
representation created entirely by the book, yet so widespread as to make up . . . 
part of the collective mental atmosphere." Roger Caillois, "Paris, mythe mod- 
erne," Nouvelle Revue francaise, 25, no. 284 (May 1 , 1937), p. 684. [M12.1] 

"The Faubourg Saint-Jacques is one of the most primitive suburbs of Paris. Why 
is that? Is it because it is surrounded by four hospitals as a citadel is surrounded 
by four bastions, and these hospitals keep the tourists away from the neighbor- 
hood? Is it hecause, leading to no major artery and terminating in no center, . . . 
the place is rarely visited by coaches? Thus, as soon as one appears in the distance, 
the lucky urchin who spies it first cups his hands around his mouth and gives a 
signal to all the inhabitants of the faubourg, just as, on the seashore, the one who 
first spots a sail on the horizon gives a signal to the others." A. Dumas, Les Mohi- 
cans de Paris, vol. 1 (Paris, 1859), p. 102 (ch. 25: "Oil il est question des sauvages 
du Faubourg Saint- Jacques"). The chapter describes nothing but the arrival of a 
piano before a house in the district. No one suspects that the object is a musical 
instrument, but all are enraptured by the sight of "a huge piece of mahogany" 
(p. 103). For mahogany furniture was as yet hardly known in this quartier. 

[M12,2] 

The first words of an advertisement for Les Mohicans de Paris: "Paris — The Mo- 
hicans! . . . Two names as discordant as the qui vive of two gigantic unknowns, 
confronting each other at the brink of an abyss traversed by that electric light 
whose source is Alexandre Dumas." [M12,3] 



Frontispiece of the third volume of Les Mohicans de Paris (Paris, 1863): "The 
Virgin Forest" [of the Rue d'Enfer]. [M12.4] 



"What wonderful precautions! What vigilance! What ingenious preparations and 
keen attention to detail! The North American savage who, even as he moves, 
obliterates his footprints in order to elude the enemy at his heels is not more 
skillful or more meticulous in his precautions." Alfred Nettement, Etudes sur le 
feuilleton-roman, vol. 1 <Paris, 1845>, p. 419. [M12,5] 

Vigny (according to Miss Corkran, Celebrities and I <London, 1902>, cited in 
L. Seche, A. de Vigny, vol. 2 <Paris, 1913>, p. 295), on viewing the chimneys of 
Paris: "I adore these chimneys. . . . Oh, yes, the smoke of Paris is more beautiful 
to me than the solitude of forests and mountains." [M12,6] 

One does well to consider the detective story in conjunction with the methodical 
genius of Poe, as Valery does (in his introduction to Les Flews du mal [Paris, 
1928], p. xx): "16 reach a point which allows us to dominate a whole field of 
activity necessarily means that one perceives a quantity of possibilities. . . . It is 
therefore not surprising that Poe, possessing so . . . sure a method, became the 
inventor of several different literary forms — that he provided the fir st . . . exam- 
ples of the scientific tale, the modern cosmogonic poem, the detective novel, the 
literature of morbid psychological states." 35 [M12a,l] 

Concerning Poe's "Man of the Crowd," this passage from an article in La Semaine 
of October 4, 1846, attributed to Balzac or to Hippolyte Castille (cited in Messac 
<Le "Detective Novel" et Vinfluence de Im pensee scientifique [Paris, 1929]>, 
p. 424): "Our eye is fixed on the man in society who moves amonglaws, snares, the 
betrayals of his confederates, as a savage in the New World moves among reptiles, 
ferocious beasts, and enemy trihes." [M12a,2] 

Apropos of "The Man of the Crowd": Bulwer<-Lytton> orchestrates his descrip- 
tion of the big-city crowd in Eugene Aram (pt. 4, ch. 5) with a reference to 
Goethe's observation that every human being, from the humblest to the most 
distinguished, carries around with him a secret which would make him hateful to 
all others if it became known, hi addition, there is already in Bulwer a confronta- 
tion between city and country that is weighted in favor of the city. [M12a,3] 

Apropos of detective fiction: "In the American hero-fantasy, the Indian's charac- 
ter plays a leading role. . . . Only the Indian rites of initiation can compare with 
the ruthlessness and savagery of rigorous American training. ... In everything on 
which the American has really set his heart, we catch a glimpse of the Indian. His 
extraordinary concentration on a particular goal, his tenacity of purpose, his 
unflinching endurance of the greatest hardships — in all this the legendary virtues 
of the Indian find full expression." C. G. Jung, Seelenprobleme der Gegenivart 
(Zurich, Leipzig, Stuttgart, 1932), p. 207 ("Seele und Erde"). 56 [M12a,4] 



Chapter 2, "Physiognomie de la rue," in the Argument du livre sur la Belgique: 
"Washing of the sidewalks and the facades of houses, even when it rains in tor- 
rents. A national mania, a universal mania. . . . No display windows in the shops. 
Flanerie, so dear to nations endowed with imagination, impossible in Brussels; 
nothing to see, and the roads impossible." Baudelaire, Oeuvres, vol. 2, ed. Y.-G. 
Le Dantec <Paris, 1932>, pp. 709-710. [M12a,5] 

Le Breton reproaches Balzac with having offered the reader "an excess of Mohi- 
cans in spencer jackets and of Iroquois in frock coats." Cited in Regis Messac, Le 
"Detective Novel" et ^influence de la pensee scientijique (Paris, 1929), p. 425. 

[M13.1] 

From the opening pages of Les Mysteres de Paris: "Everyone has read those admi- 
rable pages in which Fenimore Cooper, the American Walter Scott, has brought to 
life the fierce ways of the savages, their colorful and poetic speech, the thousand 
tricks they use when following or fleeing their enemies. ... It is our intent to bring 
before the eyes of the reader some episodes in the lives of various other barbari- 
ans, no less removed from the civilized world than the tribes so well portrayed by 
Cooper." Cited in Regis Messac, Le "Detective Novel" (Paris, 1929), p. 425. " 

[M13.2] 

Noteworthy connection between flanerie and the detective novel at the beginning 
of Les Mohicans de Paris: "At the outset Salvator says to the poet Jean Robert, You 
want to write a novel? Take Lesage, Walter Scott, and Cooper. . . .' Then, with 
characters like those of the Thousand and One Nights, they cast a piece of paper to 
the winds and follow it, convinced it will lead them to a subject for a novel, which 
is what in fact happens." Regis Messac, Le "Detective Novel" et I 'influence de la 
pensee scientijique (Paris, 1929), p. 429. [M13.3] 



On the epigones of Sue and Balzac, "who came swarming to the serial novels. The 
influence of Cooper makes itself felt here sometimes directly and sometimes 
through the mediation of Balzac or other imitators. Paul Feval, beginning in 1856 
with Les Coiiteaux d , or <The Golden Knives>, boldly transposes the habits and 
even the inhabitants of the prairie to a Parisian setting: we find there a wonder- 
fully gifted dog named Mohican, an American-style duel between hunters in a 
Paris suburb, and a redskin called Towah who kills and scalps four of his enemies 
in a hackney eab in the middle of Paris, and performs this feat with such dexterity 
that the driver never notices. Later, in Les Habits noirs <The Black Attire) (1863), 
he multiplies those comparisons of which Balzac is so fond: 'Cooper's savages in 
the middle of Paris! Is not the big city as mysterious as the forests of the New 
World?'" An additional remark: "Compare also chapters 2 and 19, in which he 
brings two vagabonds on the scene, Eehalot and Similor, 'Hurons of our lakes of 
mud, Iroquois of the gutter.'" Regis Messac, Le "Detective Novel" et I'influence de 
la pensee scientijique, series entitled Bibliotheque de la revue de litterature corn- 
puree, vol. 59, pp. 425-426. [M13,4] 



"That poetry of terror which the stratagems of enemy tribes at war create in the 
heart of the forests of America, and of which Cooper has made such good use, was 
attached to the smallest details of Parisian life. The passersby, the shops, the 
hackney carriages, a person standing at a window — to the men who had been 
numhered off for the defense of Peyrade's life, everything presented the ominous 
interest which in Cooper's novels may be found in a tree trunk, a beaver's dam, a 
rock, a buffalo skin, a motionless canoe, a hranch drooping over the water." 
Balzac, A combien V amour revient aux vieillards. m [M13a,l] 

Preformed in the figure of the flaneur is that of the detective. The flaneur re- 
quired a social legitimation of his habitus. It suited him very well to see his 
indolence presented as a plausible front, behind which, in reality, hides the riv- 
eted attention of an observer who will not let the unsuspecting malefactor out of 
his sight. [M13a,2] 

At the end of Baudelaire's essay on Marceline Desbordes-Valmore emerges the 
promeneur, who strolls through the garden landscape of her poetry; the perspec- 
tives of the past and future open before him. "But these skies are too vast to be 
everywhere pure, and the temperature of the climate too warm. . . . The idle 
passerby, who contemplates these areas veiled in mourning, feels tears of hysteria 
come to his eyes." Charles Baudelaire, I! Art romantique (Paris), p. 343 ("Mar- 
celine DesbordesAfolmore"). 39 The promeneur is no longer capable of "meander- 
ing capriciously." He takes refuge in the shadow of cities: he becomes a flaneur. 

[M13a,3] 

Jules Claretie relates of the aged Victor Hugo, at the time when he was living on the 
Rue Pigalle, that he enjoyed riding through Paris on the upper level of omnibuses. 
He loved looking down, from this eminence, on the bustle of the streets. See Ray- 
mond Escholier, Victor Hugo raconte par ceux qui font vu (Paris, 1931), p. 350 — 
Jules Claretie, "Victor Hugo." [M13a,4] 

"Do you recall a tableau . . . , created hy the most powerful pen of our day, which 
is entitled 'The Man of the Crowd'? From behind the window of a cafe, a convales- 
cent, contemplating the crowd with delight, mingles in thought with all the 
thoughts pulsating around lum. Having just escaped from the shadow of death, he 
joyfully breathes in all the germs and emanations of life; having heen on the point 
of forgetting everything, he now remembers and ardently wishes to rememher 
everything. Finally, he rushes into the crowd in search of an unknown person 
whose face, glimpsed momentarily, fascinated him. Curiosity has hecome a fatal, 
irresistible passion." Baudelaire, L'Art romantique (Paris), p. 61 ("Le Peintre de 
la vie moderne")."" [M14,l] 

Already Andre Le Breton, Balzac, Vhomme et Voeuvre <Paris, 1905>, compares 
Balzac's characters — "the usurers, the attorneys, the hankers" — to Mohicans, 
whom they resemhle more than they do the Parisians. See also Remy de Gour- 



mont, Promenades litteraires, second series (Paris, 1906), pp. 117-118: "Les 
Maitres de Balzac.") [M14.2] 



From Baudelaire's Fusees: "Man ... is always ... in a state of savagery. What are 
the perils of jungle and prairie compared to the daily shocks and conflicts of 
civilization? Whether a man embraces his dupe on the boulevard, or spears his 
prey in unknown forests, is he not . . . the most highly perfected beast of prey?'"" 

[M14.3] 

There were representations (lithographs?) by Raffet of Ecossaises and Tricycles. 
<See M3a,8.> [M14.4] 

"When Balzac lifts the roofs or penetrates the walls in order to clear a space for 
observation, . . . you listen at the doors. ... In the interest of sparking your imagi- 
nation, that is, . . . you are playing the role of what our neighbors the English, in 
their prudishness, call the 'police detective'!" Hippolyte Babou, La Verite sur le 
cas de M. Champjleury (Paris, 1857), p . 30. [M14.5] 

It would be profitable to discover certain definite features leading toward the 
physiognomy of the city dweller. Example: the sidewalk, which is reserved for 
the pedestrian, runs along the roadway. Thus, the city dweller in the course of his 
most ordinary affairs, if he is on foot, has constantly before his eyes the image of 
the competitor who overtakes him in a vehicle. — Certainly the sidewalks were 
laid down in the interests of those who go by car or by horse. When? [M14,6] 

"For the perfect flaneur, ... it is an immense joy to set up house in the heart of the 
multitude, amid the ebb and flow. . . . To be away from home, yet to feel oneself 
everywhere at home; to see the world, to he at the center of the world, yet to 
remain hidden from the world — such are a few of the slightest pleasures of those 
independent, passionate, impartial [!!] natures which the tongue can but clumsily 
define. The spectator is a prince who everywhere rejoices in his incognito. . . . The 
lover of universal life enters into the crowd as though it were an immense reservoir 
of electric energy. We might also liken him to a mirror as vast as the crowd itself; or 
to a kaleidoscope endowed with consciousness, which, with each one of its move- 
ments, represents the multiplicity of lif e and the flickering grace of all the elements 
of life." Baudelaire, L'Art romantique (Paris), pp. 64-65 ("Le Peintre de la vie 
moderne"). 12 [M14a,l] 

The Paris of 1908. "A Parisian used to crowds, to traffic, and to choosing his 
streets could still go for long walks at a steady pace and even without taking much 
care. Generally speaking, the abundance of means of transportation had not yet 
given more than three million people the . . . idea that they could move about just 
as they liked and that distance was the last thing that counted." Jules Romains, 
Les Homines de bonne volonte, hook 1 , Le 6 octobre (Paris <1932>), p . 204.' y 

[Ml4a,2] 



In Le 6 octobre, in Chapter 17, "Le Grand Voyage du petit garcon" (pp. 176-184), 
Romains describes how Louis Bastide makes his journey through Montmartre, 
from the comer of the Rue Ordener to the Rue Custine: "He had a mission to 
accomplish. Somebody had commissioned him to follow a certain course, to 
carry something, or perhaps to bear news of something" (p. 179)." In this game 
of travel, Romains develops some perspectives — particularly the alpine land- 
scape of Montmartre with the mountain inn (p. 180) — which resemble those in 
which the flaneur's imagination can lose itself. [Ml4a,3] 

Maxim of the flaneur: "In our standardized and uniform world, it is right here, 
deep helow the surface, that we must go. Estrangement and surprise, the most 
thrilling exoticism, are all close by." Daniel Halevy, Pays parisiens (Paris <1932>), 
p. 153. [Ml4a,4] 

In Jules Romains' Crime de Quinette {Les Homines de bonne volonte, book 2), one 
finds something like the negative of the solitude which is generally companion to 
the flaneur. It is, perhaps, that friendship is strong enough to break through such 
solitude — this is what is convincing about Romains' thesis. "According to my 
idea, it's always rather in that way that you make friends with anybody. You are 
present together at a moment in the life of the world, perhaps in the presence of a 
fleering secret of the world — an apparition which nobody has ever seen before 
and perhaps nobody will ever see again. It may even be something very little. 
Take two men going for a walk, for example, like us. Suddenly, thanks to a break 
in the clouds, a ray of light comes and strikes the top of a wall; and the top of the 
wall becomes, for the moment, something in some way quite extraordinary. One 
of the two men touches the other on the shoulder. The other raises his head and 
sees it too, understands it too. Then the thing up there vanishes. But they will 
know in aeternum that it once existed." Jules Romains, Les Homines de bonne 
volonte, book 2, Crime de Quinette <Paris, 1932>, pp. 175-176. 45 [M15,l] 

Mallarme. "He had crossed the Place and the Pont de l'Europe almost every day 
(he confided to George Moore), gripped by the temptation to throw himself from 
the heights of the bridge onto the iron rails, under the trains, so as finally to escape 
this mediocrity of which he was prisoner." Daniel Halevy, Pays parisiens (Paris 
<1932>), p. 105. [M15,2] 

Michelet writes: "I sprang up like a pale blade of grass between the paving stones" 
(cited in Halevy, Pays parisiens, p. 14). [M15,3] 

The tangle of the forest as archetype of mass existence in Hugo: "An astonishing 
chapter of Les Miser ables contains the following lines: 'What had just taken place 
in this street would not have surprised a forest. The trees, the copse, the heath, 
the branches roughly intertangled, the tall grass, have a darkly mysterious exist- 
ence. This wild multitude sees there sudden apparitions of the invisible; there, 



what is below man distinguishes through the dark what is above man."' 46 Gabriel 
Bounoure: "Abimes de Victor Hugo," Mesures (July 15, 1936), p. 49. DGer- 
stacker passage D [M15,4] 



"Research into that serious disease, hatred of the home. Pathology of the disease. 
Progressive growth of the disease." Charles Baudelaire, Oeuvres, ed. Le Dantec, 
vol. 2 (Paris, 1932), p. 653 ("Mon Coeur mis a mi"). 47 [M15,5] 

Letter accompanying the two "Crepuscule" poems; to Fernand Desnoyers, who 
published them in his Fontainebleau (Paris, 1855): "I'm sending you two pieces of 
poetry that more or less sum up the reveries that assail me in the twilight hours. In 
the depths of the woods, shut in by those vaults that recall sacristies and cathe- 
drals, I think of our amazing cities, and that prodigious music which rolls over the 
summits seems to me a translation of the lamentations of mankind." Cited in 
A. Seche, La Vie des Fteurs du mat (Paris, 1928), p. 110."' D Baudelaire D 

[M15a,l] 

The classic early description of the crowd in Poe: "By far the greater number of 
those who went by had a satisfied, business-like demeanor, and seemed to be 
thinking only of making their way through the press. Their brows were knit, and 
their eyes rolled quickly; when pushed against by fellow- wayfarers they evinced 
no symptom of impatience, but adjusted their clothes and hurried on. Others, 
still a numerous class, were restless in their movements, had flushed faces, and 
talked and gesticulated to themselves, as if feeling in solitude on account of the 
very denseness of the company around. When impeded in their progress, these 
people suddenly ceased muttering, but redoubled their gesticulations, and 
awaited, with an absent and overdone smile upon the lips, the course of the 
persons impeding them. If jostled, they bowed profusely to the jostlers, and 
appeared overwhelmed with confusion." Poe, Nouvelles Hutoires extraordinaires, 
trans. Ch. B. (Paris <1886>), p. 89." !) [M15a,2] 

"What are the perils of jungle and prairie compared to the daily shocks and 
conflicts of civilization? Whether a man embraces his dupe on the boulevard, or 
spears his prey in unknown forests , is he not eternal man — that is to say, the most 
highly perfected beast of prey'.'"' Charles Baudelaire, Oeuvres, ed. Le Dantec, vol. 
2 <Paris, 1932>, p. 637 ("Fusees"). 50 [M15a,3] 

The image of antiquity that so dazzled France is sometimes to be found in 
immediate proximity to the extremely modern image of America. Balzac on the 
commercial traveler: "See! What an athlete, what an arena, and what a weapon: 
he, the world, and his tongue! A daring seaman, he embarks with a stock of mere 
words to go and fish for money, five or six hundred thousand francs, say, in the 
frozen ocean, the land of savages, of Iroquois — in France!" H. de Balzac, L'lllustre 
Gaudissart, ed. Calmann-Levy (Paris), p. 5. 51 [M15a,4] 



Description of the crowd in Baudelaire, to be compared with the description in 
Poe: 



The gutter, dismal bed, carries along its foulnesses, 
Carries, boiling, the secrets of the sewers; 
It slaps in corrosive waves against the houses, 
Rushes on to jaundice and corrupt the river Seine, 
Sloshing as high as the knees of pedestrians. 

On the slippery pavements everyone passes brutal and self-absorbed, 
Elbowing and spattering us with mud, or thrusting us aside 
In their hurry to arrive somewhere. 
Everywhere mire and deluge and opacity of sky: 
Dire tableau such as dark Ezekiel might have dreamt. 

Ch. B., Oeuvres, vol. 1 <Paris, 1931>, p. 211 (Poemes divers, "Un Jour de 
pluie"). 52 [M16.1] 

On the detective novel: 

The man who hasn't signed anything, who left no picture, 
Who was not there, who said nothing: 
How can they catch him? 
Erase the traces. 

Brecht, Versuche <4-7 (Berlin, 1930)>, p. 116 (Lesebuch fur Stadtebeivohner, 
no. l). 5a [M16.2] 

The masses in Baudelaire. They stretch before the flaneur as a veil: they are the 
newest drug for the solitary. — Second, they efface all traces of the individual: 
they are the newest asylum for the reprobate and the proscript. — Finally, within 
the labyrinth of the city, the masses are the newest and most inscrutable laby- 
rinth. Through them, previously unknown chthonic traits are imprinted on the 
image of the city. [M16,3] 

The social base of flanerie is journalism. As flaneur, the literary man ventures 
into the marketplace to sell himself. Just so — but that by no means exhausts the 
social side of flanerie. "Wfe know," says Marx, "that the value of each commodity 
is determined by the quantity of labor materialized in its use value, by the 
working-time socially necessary for its production" (Marx, Das Kapital, ed. 
Korsch <Berlin, 1932>, p. 188). 5 'The journalist, as flaneur, behaves as if he too 
were aware of this. The number of work hours socially necessary for the produc- 
tion of his particular working energy is, in fact, relatively high; insofar as he 
makes it his business to let his hours of leisure on the boulevard appear as part of 
this work time, he multiplies the latter and thereby the value of his own labor. In 
his eyes, and often also in the eyes of his bosses, such value has something 
fantastic about it. Naturally, this would not be the case if he were not in the 
privileged position of making the work time necessary for the production of his 



use value available to a general and public review by passing that time on the 
boulevard and thus, as it were, exhibiting it. [M16,4] 



The press brings into play an overabundance of information, which can be all the 
more provocative the more it is exempt from any use. (Only the ubiquity of the 
reader would make possible a utilization; and so the illusion of such ubiquity is 
also generated.) The actual relation of this information to social existence is 
determined by the dependence of the information industry on financial interests 
and its alignment with these interests. — As the information industry comes into 
its own, intellectual labor fastens parasitically on every material labor, just as 
capital more and more brings every material labor into a relation of dependency. 



Simmel's apt remark concerning the uneasiness aroused in the urbanite by other 
people, people whom, in the overwhelming majority of cases, he sees without 
hearing, 55 would indicate that, at least in their beginnings, the physiognomies 
correction: physiologies> were motivated by, among other things, the wish to 
dispel this uneasiness and render it harmless. Otherwise, the fantastic pretensions 
of these little volumes could not have sat well with their audience. [M16a,2] 

There is an effort to master the new experiences of the city within the framework 
of the old traditional experiences of nature. Hence the schemata of the virgin 
forest and the sea (Meryon and Ponson du Terrail). [M16a,3] 

Trace and aura. The trace is appearance of a nearness, however far removed the 
thing that left it behind may be. The aura is appearance of a distance, however 
close the thing that calls it forth. In the trace, we gain possession of the thing; in 
the aura, it takes possession of us. [Ml 6a,4] 



Auguste-Marseille Barthelemy, Paris: Revue satirique d M. G. Delessert, Prefet de 



"M. Le Breton says that it is the usurers, attorneys, and hankers in Balzac, rather 
than the Parisians, who sometimes seem like ruthless Mohicans, and he believes 
that the influence of Fenimore Cooper was not particularly advantageous for the 
author of Gobsech. This is possihle, hut difficult to prove." Remy de Gonrmont, 
Promenades litteraires, 2nd series (Paris, 1906), pp. 117-118 ("Les Maitres de 



[M16a,l] 



Faithful to my old established way, 
I like to turn the street into a study; 

How often, then, as chance conducts my dreaming steps, 
I blunder, unawares, into a group of pavers! 



Police (Paris, 1838), p. 8. 



[M16a,5] 



Balzac"). 



[M17,l] 



"The jostling crowdedness and the motley disorder of metropolitan communica- 
tion would ... he unbearahle without . . . psychological distance. Since contempo- 



rary urban culture . . . forces us to be physically close to an enormous number of 
people, . . . people would sink completely into despair if the objectilication of 
social relationships did not bring with it an inner boundary and reserve. The 
pecuniary character of relationships, either openly or concealed in a thousand 
forms, places [a] . . . functional distance between people that is an inner protec- 
tion . . . against the overcrowded proximity." Georg Simmel, Philosophie des 
Geldes (Leipzig, 1900), p. 514.™ [Ml7,2] 



Prologue to Le Flaneur, newspaper for the masses, published at the office of the 
town crier, 45 Rue de la Harpe (the first and, no doubt, only number, dated May 
3, 1848): "To go out strolling, these days, while puffing one's tobacco, . . . while 
dreaming of evening pleasures, seems to us a century behind the times. We are 
not the sort to refuse all knowledge of the customs of another age; but, in our 
strolling, let us not forget our rights and our obligations as citizens. The times are 
necessitous; they demand all our attention, all day long. Let us be flaneurs, but 
patriotic flaneurs." (J. Montaigu) . An early specimen of that dislocation of word 
and meaning which belongs among the devices of journalism. [Ml7,3] 



Balzac anecdote: "He was with a friend one day when he passed a heggar in rags on 
the boulevard. His companion was astonished to see Balzac touch his own sleeve 
with his hand; he had just felt there the conspicuous rip that gaped at the elbow of 
the mendicant." Anatole Cerfberr and Jules Christophe, Repertoire de la 
Comedie humaine de H. de Balzac (Paris, 1887), p. viii (Introduction by Paul 
Bourget). [Ml7,4] 



Apropos of Flaubert's remark that "observation is guided above all by imagina- 
tion," 57 the visionary faculty of Balzac: "It is important to note, first of all, that this 
visionary power could never be exercised directly. Balzac did not have time to 
live; ... he did not have the leisure ... to study men, after the fashion of Moliere 
and Saint-Simon, through daily, familiar contact. He cut his existence in two, 
writing by night, sleeping by day" (p. x). Balzac speaks of a "retrospective pene- 
tration." "It would seem that he took hold of the givens of experience and then 
tossed them, as it were, into a crucible of dreams." A. Cerfberr and J. Christophe, 
Repertoire de la Comedie humaine de H. de Bahac (Paris, 1887), p. xi (Introduction 
by Paul Bourget) . [Ml7a,l] 



Empathy with the commodity is fundamentally empathy with exchange value 
itself. The flaneur is the virtuoso of this empathy. He takes the concept of market- 
ability itself for a stroll. Just as his final ambit is the department store, his last 
incarnation is the sandwich-man. [Ml7a,2] 



In a brasserie in the vicinity of the Gare Saint-Lazare, des Esseintes feels himself 
to he already in England. [Ml7a,3] 



Regarding the intoxication of empathy felt by the flaneur, a great passage from 
Flaubert may be adduced. It could well date from the period of the composition 
of Madame Bovary: "Today, for instance, as man and woman, both lover and 
mistress, I rode in a forest on an autumn afternoon under the yellow leaves, and 
I was also the horses, the leaves, the wind, the words my people uttered, even the 
red sun that made them almost close their love-drowned eyes." 58 Cited in Henri 
Grappin, "Le Mysticisme poetique <et l'imagination> de Gustave Flaubert," Re- 
vue de Paris (December 15, 1912), p. 856. [M17a,4] 

On the intoxication of empathy felt by the flaneur (and by Baudelaire as well) , 
this passage from Flaubert: "I see myself at different moments of history, very 
clearly. ... I was boatman on the Nile, leno [procurer] in Rome at the time of the 
Punic wars, then Greek rhetorician in Suburra, where I was devoured by bed- 
bugs. I died, during the Crusades, from eating too many grapes on the beach in 
Syria. I was pirate and monk, mountebank and coachman — perhaps Emperor of 
the East, who knows?" 59 Grappin, "Le Mysticisme poetique <et l'imagination> de 
Gustave Flaubert," Revue de Paris (December 15, 1912), p. 624. [M17a,5] 

I 

Hell is a city much like London — 

A populous and a smoky city; 
There are all sorts of people undone, 
And there is little or no fun done; 

Small justice shown, and still less pity. 

II 

There is a Castles, and a Canning, 

A Cobbett, and a Castlereagh; 
All sorts of caitiff corpses planning 
All sorts of cozening for trepanning 

Corpses less corrupt than they. 

Ill 

There is a * * *, who has lost 

His wits, or sold them, none knows which; 
He walks about a douhle ghost, 
And though as thin as Fraud almost — 

Ever grows more grim and rich, 

IV 

There is a Chancery Court; a king; 

A manufacturing mob; a set 
Of thieves who by themselves are sent 
Similar thieves to represent; 

An army; and a public debt. 



Which last is a scheme of paper money, 

And means — being interpreted — 
"Bees, keep your wax — give us the honey, 
And we will plant, while skies arc sunny, 
Flowers, which in winter serve instead." 

VI 

There is a great talk of revolution — 
And a great chance of despotism — 
German soldiers — camps — confusion — 
Tumults — lotteries — rage — delusion — 
Cin — suicide — and methodism; 

VII 

Taxes too, on wine and bread, 

And meat, and heer, and tea, and cheese, 
From which those patriots pure are fed, 
Who gorge before they reel to lied 

The tenfold essence of all these. 



IX 

Lawyers — judges — old hohnobhers 

Are there — bailiffs — chancellors — 
Bishops — great and little robhers — 
Rhymesters — pamphleteers — stock-jobbers — 

Men of glory in the wars, — 

X 

Things whose trade is, over ladies 

To lean, and flirt, and stare, and simper, 
Till all that is divine in woman 
Crows cruel, courteous, smooth, inhuman, 

Crucified 'twixt a smile and a whimper. 

Shelley, "Peter Bell the Third" ("Part the Third: Hell")/"' [M18] 

Illuminating for the conception of the crowd: in "Des Vetters Eckfenster" <My 
Cousin's Corner Window>, the visitor still thinks that the cousin watches the 
activity in the marketplace only because he enjoys the play of colors. And in the 
long run, he thinks, this will surely become tiring. Similarly, and at around the 
same time, Gogol writes, in "The Lost Letter," of the annual fair in Konotop: 
"There were such crowds moving up and down the streets that it made one giddy 
to watch them." Russische Gespenster-Geschichten (Munich <1921>), p. 69. 61 

[M18a,l] 



Tissot, in justifying his proposal to tax luxury horses: "The intolerable noise made 
day and night by twenty thousand private carriages in the streets of Paris, the 
continual shaking of the houses, the inconvenience and insomnia that result for so 
many inhabitants of the city — all this deserves some compensation." Amedee de 
Tissot, Paris et Londres compares (Paris, 1830), pp. 172-173. [Ml8a,2] 

The flanenr and the shopfronts: "First of all, there are the flanenrs of the boule- 
vard, whose entire existence unfolds het ween the Church of the Madeleine and the 
Theatre dn Gymnase. Each day sees them returning to this narrow space, which 
they never pass beyond, examining the displays of goods, surveying the shoppers 
seated hefore the doors of cal'es. . . . They would be able to tell you if Goupil or 
Deforge have put out a new print or a new painting, and if Barbedienne has 
repositioned a vase or an arrangement; they know all the photographers' studios 
by heart and could recite the sequence of signs without omitting a single one." 
Pierre Larousse, Grand Dictionnaire universel (Paris <1872>), vol. 8, p. 436. 

[M18a,3] 

On the provincial character of "Des Vetters Eckfenster." "Since that unfortunate 
period when an insolent and overbearing enemy inundated our country," the 
Berlin populace has acquired smoother manners. "You see, dear cousin, how 
nowadays, by contrast, the market offers a delightful picture of prosperity and 
peaceful manners." E. T. A. Hoffmann, Ausgewdhlte Schriften, vol. 14 (Stuttgart, 



1839), pp. 238, 240. ,i2 [Ml9,l] 

The sandwich-man is the last incarnation of the flaneur [Ml9,2] 

On the provincial character of "Des "Vetters Eckfenster": the cousin wants to 

teach his visitor "the rudiments of the art of seeing." 011 [M19.3] 



On July 7, 1838, G. E. Gnhrauer writes to Varuhagen about Heine: "He was 
having a had time with his eyes in the spring. On our last meeting, I accompanied 
him part of the way along the houlevard. The splendor and vitality of that unique 
street moved me to boundless admiration, while, against this, Heine now laid 
weighty emphasis on the horrors attending this center of the world." Compare also 
Engels on the crowd <M5a,l>. Heinrich Heine, Gespriiche, ed. Hugo Bieher (Ber- 
lin, 1926), p. 163. [M19.4] 

"This city marked hy a vitality, a circulation, an activity without equal is also, hy 
a singular contrast, the place where one finds the most idlers, loungers, and rub- 
bernecks." Pierre Larousse, Grand Dictionnaire universel (Paris <1872>), vol. 8, 
p. 436 (article entitled "Flaneur"). [M19,5] 



Hegel writing from Paris to his wife, September 3, 1827: "As I go through the 
streets, the people look just the same as in Berliu, everyone dressed the same, 



about the same faces, the same appearance, yet in a populous mass." Briefe von 
unci an Hegel, ed. Karl Hegel (Leipzig, 1887), part 2, p. 257 (Werke, vol. 19, part 
2)." [M19,6] 



Londres <London> 

It is an immense place, and so spread out 

That it takes a day to cross it by omnibus. 

And, far and wide, there is nothing to see 

But houses, public buildings, and high monuments, 

Set down haphazardly by the hand of time. 

Long black chimneys, the steeples of industry, 

Open their mouths and exhale Rimes 

From their hot bellies to the open air; 

Vast white domes and Gothic spires 

Float in the vapor above the heaps of bricks. 

An ever swelling, unapproachable river, 

Rolling its muddy currents in sinuous onrush, 

Like that frightful stream of the underworld,'' 5 

And arched over by gigantic bridges on piers 

That mimic the old Colossus of Rhodes, 

Allows thousands of ships to ply their way; 

A great tide polluted and always unsettled 

Recirculates the riches of the world. 

Busy stockyards, open shops are ready 

To receive a universe of goods. 

Above, the sky tormented, cloud upon cloud, 

The sun, like a corpse, wears a shroud on its face, 

Or, sometimes, in the poisonous atmosphere, 

Looks out like a miner coal-blackened. 

There, amid the somber mass of things, 

An obscure people lives and dies in silence — 

Millions of beings in thrall to a fatal instinct, 

Seeking gold by avenues devious and straight. 

To be compared with Baudelaire's review of Barbier, his portrayal of Meryon, the 
poems of "Tableaux parisiens." In Barbier's poetry, two elements — the "descrip- 
tion" of the great city and the social unrest — should be pretty much distin- 
guished. Only traces of these elements still remain with Baudelaire, in whom 
they have been joined to an altogether heterogeneous third element. Auguste 
Barbier, Iambes et poemes (Paris, 1841), pp. 193-194. The poem is from the se- 
quence Laiare of 1837. [Ml9a,l] 



If one compares Baudelaire's discussion of Meryon with Barbier's "Londres," 
one asks oneself whether the gloomy image of the "most disquieting of capi- 
tals" 66 — the image, that is, of Paris — was not very materially determined by the 
texts of Barbier and of Poe. London was certainly ahead of Paris in industrial 
development. [Ml9a,2] 



Beginning of Rousseau's Second Promenade: "Having therefore decided to de- 
scribe my habitual state of mind in this, the strangest situation which any mortal 
will ever know, I could diink of no simpler or surer way of carrying out my plan 
than to keep a faithful record of my solitary walks and the reveries that occupy 
them, when I give free rein to my thoughts and let my ideas follow their natural 
course, unrestricted and unconfmed. These hours of solitude and meditation are 
the only ones in the day when I am completely myself and my own master, with 
nothing to distract or hinder me, the only ones when I can truly say that I am 
what nature meant me to be." Jeanjacques Rousseau, Les Reveries du promeneur 
solitaire; preceded by Dix Jours a Ermenonville, by Jacques de Lacretelle (Paris, 
1926), p. 15. 67 — The passage presents the integral link between contemplation 
and idleness. What is decisive is that Rousseau already — in his idleness — is 
enj oying himself, but has not yet accomplished the turning outward. [M2 0 , 1 ] 

"London Bridge." "A little while ago I was walking across London Bridge and I 
paused to contemplate what is for me an endless pleasure — the sight of a rich, 
thick, complex waterway whose nacreous sheets and oily patches, clouded with 
white smoke-puffs, are loaded with a confusion of ships. ... I leaned upon my 
elbows. . . . Delight of vision held me with a ravenous thirst, involved in the play of 
a light of inexhaustihle richness. But endlessly pacing and flowing at my back I was 
aware of another river, a river of the blind eternally in pursuit of [its] immediate 
material object. This seemed to me no crowd of individual beings, each with his 
own history, his private god, his treasures and his scars, his interior monologue 
and his fate; rather 1 made of it — unconsciously, in the depths of my body, in the 
shaded places of my eyes — a flux of identical particles, equally sucked in by the 
same nameless void, their deaf headlong current pattering monotonously over the 
bridge. Never have I so felt solitude, mingled with pride and anguish." Paul 
Valery, Choses tues <Paris, 1930>, pp. 122-124/'" [M20,2] 

Basic to flanerie, among other things, is the idea that the fruits of idleness are 
more precious than the fruits of labor. The flaneur, as is well known, makes 
"studies." On this subject, the nineteenth-century Larousse has the following to 
say: "His eyes open, his ear ready, searching for something entirely different from 
what the crowd gathers to see. A word dropped by chance will reveal to him one 
of those character traits that caimot be invented and that must be drawn directly 
from life; those physiognomies so naively attentive will furnish the painter with 
the expression he was dreaming of; a noise, insignificant to every other ear, will 
strike that of the musician and give him the cue for a harmonic combination; 
even for the thinker, the philosopher lost in his reverie, this external agitation is 
profitable: it stirs up his ideas as the storm stirs the waves of the sea. . . . Most 
men of genius were great flaneurs — but industrious, productive flaneurs. . . . 
Often it is when the artist and the poet seem least occupied with their work that 
they are most profoundly absorbed in it. In the first years of this century, a man 
was seen walking each and every day — regardless of the weather, be it sunshine 
or snow — around the ramparts of the city of Vienna. This man was Beethoven, 



who, in the midst of his wanderings, would work out his magnificent symphonies 
in his head before putting them down on paper. For him, the world no longer 
existed; in vain would people greet him respectfully as he passed. He saw noth- 
ing; his mind was elsewhere." Pierre Larousse, Grand Dictionnaire universel (Paris 
<1872>), vol. 8, p. 436 (article entitled, "Flaneur"). [M20a,l] 

Beneath the roofs of Paris: "These Parisian savannahs consisting of roofs leveled 
out to form a plain, but covering abysses teeming with population." Balzac, La 
Peau de chagrin, ed. Flammarion, p. 95. 69 The end of a long description of the 
roof -landscapes of Paris. [M20a,2] 

Description of the crowd in Proust: "All these people who paced np and down the 
seawall promenade, tacking as violently as if it had been the deck of a ship (for 
they could not lift a leg without at the same time waving their arms, turning their 
heads and eyes, settling their shoulders, compensating by a balancing movement 
on one side for the movement they had just made on the other, and puffing out 
their faces), and who, pretending not to see so as to let it be thought that they were 
not interested, but covertly watching, for fear of running against the people who 
were walking beside or coming towards them, did, in fact, butt into them, became 
entangled with them, because each was mutually the object of the same secret 
attention veiled beneath the same apparent disdain; their love — and consequently 
their fear — of the crowd being one of the most powerful motives in all men, 
whether they seek to please other people or to astonish them, or to show them that 
they despise them." Marcel Pronst, A I'Ombre des jeunes filles en Jleurs (Paris), 
vol. 3, p. 36.™ [M21.1] 

The critique of the Noiwelles Hutoires extraordinaires which Armand de Pont- 
martin publishes in Le Spectateur of September 19, 1857, contains a sentence that, 
although aimed at the overall character of the book, would nevertheless have its 
rightful place in an analysis of the "man of the crowd": "It was certainly there in 
a striking form, that implacable democratic and American severity, reckoning 
human beings as no more than numbers, only to end by attributing to numbers 
something of the life, animation, and spirit of the human being." But doesn't the 
sentence have a more immediate reference to the Hutoires extraordinaires, which 
appeared earlier? (And where is "the man of the crowd"?) Baudelaire, Oeuvres 
completes, Translations, Nouvelles Hutoires extraordinaires, ed. Crepet (Paris, 1933), 
p. 3 1 5 . — The critique is, a t bottom, mean-spirited. [M2 1,2] 

The "spirit of noctambulism" finds a place in Proust (under a different name) : 
"The capricious spirit that sometimes leads a woman of high rank to say to 
herself 'What fun it will be!' and then to end her evening in a deadly tiresome 
manner, getting up enough energy to go and rouse someone, remain a while by 
the bedside in her evening wrap, and finally, finding nothing to say and noticing 
that it is very late, go home to bed." Marcel Proust, Le lemps retrouve (Paris), vol. 
2, p. 185. 71 [M21a,l] 



The most characteristic building projects of the nineteenth century — railroad 
stations, exhibition halls, department stores (according to Giedion) — all have 
matters of collective importance as their object. The fianeur feels drawn to these 
"despised, everyday" structures, as Giedion calls them. In these constructions, 
the appearance of great masses on the stage of history was already foreseen. 
They form the eccentric frame within which the last privateers so readily dis- 
played themselves. (See Kla,5.) [M21a,2] 