[On the Theory of Knowledge, Theory of Progress] 

Times are more interesting than people. 

— Honore de Balzac, Critique litteraire, Introduction by Louis Lumet 
(Paris, 1912), p. 103 [Guy de la Poimeraye, Huloire de I'Amiral 
Cdigny] 

The reform of consciousness consists solely in ... the awaken- 
ing of the world from its dream about itself. 

— Karl Marx, Der Instorische Materialisms: Die Friihschriflen (Leipzig 
<1932>), vol. 1, p. 226 (letter from Marx to Ruge; Kreuzenach, Sep- 
tember 1843)' 



In the fields with which we are concerned, knowledge comes only in lightning 
flashes. The text is the long roll of thunder that follows. [Nl,l] 

Comparison of other people's attempts to the undertaking of a sea voyage in 
which the ships are drawn off course by the magnetic North Pole. Discover this 
North Pole. What for others are deviations are, for me, the data which determine 
my course. — On the differentials of time (which, for others, disturb the main 
lines of the inquiry), I base my reckoning. [Nl,2] 

Say something about the method of composition itself: how everything one is 
thinking at a specific moment in time must at all costs be incorporated into the 
project then at hand. Assume that the intensity of the project is thereby attested, 
or that one's thoughts, from the very beginning, bear this project within them as 
their telos. So it is with the present portion of the work, which aims to charac- 
terize and to preserve the intervals of reflection, the distances lying between the 
most essential parts of this work, which are turned most intensively to the out- 
side. [Nl,3] 

To cultivate fields where, until now, only madness has reigned. Forge ahead with 
the whetted axe of reason, looking neither right nor left so as not to succumb to 
the horror that beckons from deep in the primeval forest. Every ground must at 
some point have been made arable by reason, must have been cleared of the 



■ ■ 

-■ . ........ ...... ■ ■ .. ... 

V -; - : -: ; ' 

v.- - ~ - ■ - - >:- 

■■ 5 ■ ■ '" "' ^ i ' V.:' ' , 
,. ■ . . ■ ■ ■ 




■ : 




rgiM^-rrin-i - - 



* • , ■ .■■-.■:* -. " f ■'" 
, i - „ f- 



A page of Benjamin's manuscript, showing the beginning of 
Convolute N. 



undergrowth of delusion and myth. This is to be accomplished here for the 
terrain of the nineteenth century. [Nl,4] 

These notes devoted to the Paris arcades were begun under an open sky of 
cloudless blue that arched above the foliage; and yet — owing to the millions of 
leaves that were visited by the fresh breeze of diligence, the stertorous breath of 
the researcher, the storm of youthful zeal, and the idle wind of curiosity — they've 
been covered with the dust of centuries. For the painted sky of summer that looks 



down from the arcades in the reading room of the Bibliotheque Nationale in Paris 
has spread out over them its dreamy, unlit ceiling. [Nl,5] 



The pathos of this work: there are no periods of decline. Attempt to see the 
nineteenth century just as positively as I tried to see the seventeenth, in the work 
on Trauer spiel. No belief in periods of decline. By the same token, every city is 
beautiful to me (from outside its borders), just as all talk of particular languages' 
having greater or lesser value is to me unacceptable. [Nl,6] 

And, later, the glassed-in spot facing my seat at the Staatsbibliothek. Charmed 
circle inviolate, virgin terrain for the soles of figures I conjured. [Nl,7] 

Pedagogic side of this undertaking: "To educate the image-making medium 
within us, raising it to a stereoscopic and dimensional seeing into the depths of 
historical shadows." The words are Rudolf Borchardt's in Epilegomena zu Dante, 
vol. 1 (Berlin, 1923), pp. 56-57. [Nl,8] 

Delimitation of the tendency of this project with respect to Aragon: whereas 
Aragon persists within the realm of dream, here the concern is to find the constel- 
lation of awakening. While in Aragon there remains an impressionistic element, 
namely the "mythology" (and this impressionism must be held responsible for 
the many vague philosophemes in his book), 2 here it is a question of the dissolu- 
tion of "mythology" into the space of history. That, of course, can happen only 
through the awakening of a not-yet-conscious knowledge of what has been. 

[N1.9] 

This work has to develop to the highest degree the art of citing without quotation 
marks. Its theory is intimately related to that of montage. [Nl.10] 

"Apart from a certain haut-gout charm," says Giedion, "the artistic draperies and 
wall-hangings of the previous century have come to seem musty." <Sigfried> 
Giedion, Bauen in Frankreich (Leipzig and Berlin <1928>), p. 3. We, however, 
believe that the charm they exercise on us is proof that these things, too, contain 
material of vital importance for us — not indeed for our building practice, as is the 
case with the constructive possibilities inherent in iron frameworks, but rather for 
our understanding, for the radioscopy, if you will, of the situation of the bour- 
geois class at the moment it evinces the first signs of decline. In any case, material 
of vital importance politically; this is demonstrated by the attachment of the 
Surrealists to these things, as much as by their exploitation in contemporary 
fashion. In other words: just as Giedion teaches us to read off the basic features of 
today's architecture in the buildings erected around 1850, we, in turn, would 
recognize today's life, today's forms, in the life and in the apparently secondary, 
lost forms of that epoch. [ N 1 , 1 1 ] 



"In the windswept stairways of the Eiffel Tower, or, better still, in the steel sup- 
ports of a Pont Transbordeur, one meets with the fundamental aesthetic experi- 
ence of present-day architecture: through the thin net of iron that hangs 
suspended in the air, things stream — ships, ocean, houses, masts, landscape, 
harbor. They lose their distinctive shape, swirl into one another as we climb 
downward, merge simultaneously." Sigfried Giedion, Bauen in Frankreich (Leipzig 
and Berlin) , p. 7. In the same way, the historian today has only to erect a slender 
but sturdy scaffolding — a philosophic structure — in order to draw the most vital 
aspects of the past into his net. But just as the magnificent vistas of the city 
provided by the new construction in iron (again, see Giedion, illustrations on 
pp. 61-63) for a long time were reserved exclusively for the workers and engi- 
neers, so too the philosopher who wishes here to garner fresh perspectives must 
be someone immune to vertigo — an independent and, if need be, solitary worker. 

[Nla,l] 

The book on the Baroque exposed the seventeenth century to the light of the 
present day. Here, something analogous must be done for the nineteenth century, 
but with greater distinctness. [Nla,2] 

Modest methodological proposal for the cultural-historical dialectic. It is very 
easy to establish oppositions, according to determinate points of view, within the 
various "fields" of any epoch, such that on one side lies the "productive," "for- 
ward-looking," "lively," "positive" part of the epoch, and on the other side the 
abortive, retrograde, and obsolescent. The very contours of the positive element 
will appear distinctly only insofar as this element is set off against the negative. 
On the other hand, every negation has its value solely as background for the 
delineation of the lively, the positive. It is therefore of decisive importance that a 
new partition be applied to this initially excluded, negative component so that, by 
a displacement of the angle of vision (but not of the criteria!), a positive element 
emerges anew in it too — something different from that previously signified. And 
so on, ad infinitum, until the entire past is brought into the present in a historical 
apocatastasis. 3 [Nla,3] 

The foregoing, put differently: the indestructibility of the highest life in all things. 
Against the prognosticators of decline. Consider, though: Isn't it an affront to 
Goethe to make a film of Faust, and isn't there a world of difference between the 
poem Faust and the film Faust? lies, certainly. But, again, isn't there a whole world 
of difference between a bad film of Faust and a good one? What matter are never 
the "great" but only the dialectical contrasts, which often seem indistinguishable 
from nuances. It is nonetheless from them that life is always born anew. 

[Nla,4] 



To encompass both Breton and Le Cor busier — that would mean drawing the 
spirit of contemporary France like a bow, with which knowledge shoots the 
moment in the heart. [Nla,5] 



Marx lays bare the causal connection between economy and culture. For us, what 
matters is the thread of expression. It is not the economic origins of culture that 
will be presented, but the expression of the economy in its culture. At issue, in 
other words, is the attempt to grasp an economic process as perceptible Ur- 
phenomenon, from out of which proceed all manifestations of life in the arcades 
(and, accordingly, in the nineteenth century). [Nla,6] 

This research — which deals fundamentally with the expressive character of the 
earliest industrial products, the earliest industrial architecture, the earliest ma- 
chines, but also the earliest department stores, advertisements, and so on — thus 
becomes important for Marxism in two ways. First, it will demonstrate how the 
milieu in which Marx's doctrine arose affected that doctrine through its expres- 
sive character (which is to say, not only through causal connections) ; but, second, 
it will also show in what respects Marxism, too, shares the expressive character of 
the material products contemporary with it. [Nla,7] 

Method of this project: literary montage. I needn't say anything. Merely show. I 
shall purloin no valuables, appropriate no ingenious formulations. But the rags, 
the refuse — these I will not inventory but allow, in the only way possible, to come 
into their own: by making use of them. [Nla,8] 

Bear in mind that commentary on a reality (for it is a question here of commen- 
tary, of interpretation in detail) calls for a method completely different from that 
required by commentary on a text. In the one case, the scientific mainstay is 
theology; in the other case, philology. [N2 , 1 ] 

It may be considered one of the methodological objectives of this work to demon- 
strate a historical materialism which has annihilated within itself the idea of 
progress. Just here, historical materialism has every reason to distinguish itself 
sharply from bourgeois habits of thought. Its founding concept is not progress 
but actualization. [N2,2] 

Historical "understanding" is to be grasped, in principle, as an afterlife of that 
which is understood; and what has been recognized in the analysis of the "after- 
life of works," in the analysis of "fame," is therefore to be considered the founda- 
tion of history in general. [N2,3] 

How this work was written: rung by rung, according as chance would offer a 
narrow foothold, and always like someone who scales dangerous heights and 
never allows himself a moment to look around, for fear of becoming dizzy (but 
also because he would save for the end the full force of the panorama opening 
out to him). [N2,4] 



Overcoming the concept of "progress" and overcoming the concept of "period of 
decline" are two sides of one and the same thing. [N2,5] 



A central problem of historical materialism that ought to be seen in the end; Must 
the Marxist understanding of history necessarily be acquired at the expense of 
the perceptibility of history? Or: in what way is it possible to conjoin a height- 
ened graphicness <Anschaulichkeit> to the realization of the Marxist method? The 
first stage in this undertaking will be to carry over the principle of montage into 
history. That is, to assemble large-scale constructions out of the smallest and 
most precisely cut components. Indeed, to discover in the analysis of the small 
individual moment the crystal of the total event. And, therefore, to break with 
vulgar historical naturalism. To grasp the construction of history as such. In the 
structure of commentary. D Refuse of History D [N2,6] 

A Kierkegaard citation in Wiesengrund, with commentary following: "'One may 
arrive at a similar consideration of the mythical by beginning with the imagistic. 
When, in an age of reflection, one sees the imagistic protrude ever so slightly and 
unobserved in a reflective representation and, like an antediluvian fossil, suggest 
another species of existence which washed away doubt, one will perhaps be 
amazed that the image could ever have played such an important role.' 
Kierkegaard wards off the 'amazement' with what follows. Yet this amazement 
heralds the deepest insight into the interrelation of dialectic, myth, and image. For 
it is not as the continuously living and present that nature prevails in the dialectic. 
Dialectic comes to a stop in the image, and, in the context of recent history, it cites 
the mythical as what is long gone: nature as primal history. For this reason, the 
images — which, like those of the interieur, bring dialectic and myth to the point of 
indifferentiation — are truly 'antediluvian fossils.' They may be called dialectical 
images, to use Benjamin's expression, whose compelling definition of 'allegory' 
also holds true for Kierkegaard's allegorical intention taken as a figure of histori- 
cal dialectic and mythical nature. According to this definition, 'in allegory the 
observer is confronted with the fmcies liippocratica of history, a petrified primor- 
dial landscape. '" Theodor Wiesengrund- Adorno, Kierkegaard (Tiihingen, 1933), 
p. 60.'' □ Refuse of History D [N2,7] 

Only a thoughtless observer can deny that correspondences come into play 
between the world of modem technology and the archaic symbol-world of my- 
thology. Of course, initially the technologically new seems nothing more than 
that. But in the very next childhood memory, its traits are already altered. Every 
childhood achieves something great and irreplaceable for humanity. By the inter- 
est it takes in technological phenomena, by the curiosity it displays before any 
sort of invention or machinery, every childhood binds the accomplishments of 
technology to the old worlds of symbol. There is nothing in the realm of nature 
that from the outset would be exempt from such a bond. Only, it takes form not 
in the aura of novelty but in the aura of the habitual. In memory, childhood, and 
dream. D Awakening D [N2a, 1 ] 

The momentum of primal history in the past is no longer masked, as it used to 
be, by the tradition of church and family — this at once the consequence and 



condition of technology. The old prehistoric dread already envelops the world of 
our parents because we ourselves are no longer bound to this world by tradition. 
The perceptual worlds <Merkwelten> break up more rapidly; what they contain of 
the mythic comes more quickly and more brutally to the fore; and a wholly 
different perceptual world must be speedily set up to oppose it. This is how the 
accelerated tempo of technology appears in light of the primal history of the 
present. D Awakening D [N2a,2] 

It's not that what is past casts its light on what is present, or what is present its 
light on what is past; rather, image is that wherein what has been comes together 
in a flash with the now to form a constellation. In other words, image is dialectics 
at a standstill. For while the relation of the present to the past is a purely tempo- 
ral, continuous one, the relation of what-has-been to the now is dialectical: is not 
progression but image, suddenly emergent. — Only dialectical images are genuine 
images (that is, not archaic); and the place where one encounters them is lan- 
guage. D Awakening □ [N2a,3] 

In studying Simmel's presentation of Goethe's concept of truth, 5 1 came to see 
very clearly that my concept of origin in the Irauer spiel book is a rigorous and 
decisive transposition of this basic Goethean concept from the domain of nature 
to that of history. Origin — it is, in effect, the concept of f/r-phenomenon ex- 
tracted from the pagan context of nature and brought into the Jewish contexts of 
history. Now, in my work on the arcades I am equally concerned with fathoming 
an origin. To be specific, I pursue the origin of the forms and mutations of the 
Paris arcades from their beginning to their decline, and I locate this origin in the 
economic facts. Seen from the standpoint of causality, however (and that means 
considered as causes), these facts would not be primal phenomena; they become 
such only insof ar as in their own individual development — "unfolding" might be 
a better term — they give rise to the whole series of the arcade's concrete histori- 
cal forms, just as the leaf unfolds from itself all the riches of the empirical world 
of plants. [N2a,4] 

"As I study this age which is so close to us and so remote, I compare myself to a 
surgeon operating with local anesthetic: I work in areas that are numh, dead — yet 
the patient is alive and can still talk." Paul Morand, 1900 (Paris, 1931), pp. 6-7. 

[N2a,5] 

What distinguishes images from the "essences" of phenomenology is their his- 
torical index. (Heidegger seeks in vain to rescue history for phenomenology 
abstractly through "historicity.") 1 ' These images are to be thought of entirely 
apart from the categories of the "human sciences," from so-called habitus, from 
style, and the like. For the historical index of the images not only says that they 
belong to a particular time; it says, above all, that they attain to legibility only at 
a particular time. And, indeed, this acceding "to legibility" constitutes a specific 
critical point in the movement at their interior. Every present day is determined 



by the images that are synchronic with it: each "now" is the now of a particular 
recognizability. In it, truth is charged to the bursting point with time. (This point 
of explosion, and nothing else, is the death of the intentio, which thus coincides 
with the birth of authentic historical time, the time of truth.) It is not that what is 
past casts its light on what is present, or what is present its light on what is past; 
rather, image is that wherein what has been comes together in a flash with the 
now to form a constellation. In other words: image is dialectics at a standstill. For 
while the relation of the present to the past is purely temporal, the relation of 
what-has-been to the now is dialectical: not temporal in nature but figural 
<bildlich>. Only dialectical images are genuinely historical — that is, not archaic — 
images. The image that is read — which is to say, the image in the now of its 
recognizability — bears to the highest degree the imprint of the perilous critical 
moment on which all reading is founded. [N3, 1 ] 

Resolute refusal of the concept of "timeless truth" is in order. Nevertheless, truth 
is not — as Marxism would have it — a merely contingent function of knowing, 
but is bound to a nucleus of time lying hidden within the knower and the known 
alike. This is so true that the eternal, in any case, is far more the ruffle on a dress 
than some idea. [N3,2] 

Outline the story of The Arcades Project in terms of its development. Its properly 
problematic component: the refusal to renounce anything that would demon- 
strate the materialist presentation of history as imagistic <bildh*ft> in a higher 
sense than in the traditional presentation. [N3,3] 

A remark by Ernst Bloch apropos of The Arcades Project: "History displays its 
Scotland Yard badge." It was in the context of a conversation in which I was 
describing how this work — comparable, in method, to the process of splitting the 
atom — liberates the enormous energies of history that are bound up in the "once 
upon a time" of classical historiography. The history that showed things "as they 
really were" was the strongest narcotic of the century. [N3,4] 

"The truth will not escape us," reads one of Keller's epigrams. 7 He thus formu- 
lates the concept of tiuth with which these presentations take issue. [N3a,l] 

"Primal history of the nineteenth century" — this would b e of no interest if it were 
understood to mean that forms of primal history are to be recovered among the 
inventory of the nineteenth century. Only where the nineteenth century would 
be presented as originary form of primal history — in a form, that is to say, in 
which the whole of primal history groups itself anew in images appropriate to 
that century — only there does the concept of a primal history of the nineteenth 
century have meaning. [N3a,2] 



Is awakening perhaps the synthesis of dream consciousness (as thesis) and wak- 
ing consciousness (as antithesis)? Then the moment of awakening would be 



identical with the "now of recognizability," in which things put on their true — 
surrealist — face. Thus, in Proust, the importance of staking an entire life on life's 
supremely dialectical point of rupture: awakening. Proust begins with an evoca- 
tion of the space of someone waking up. [N3a,3] 

"If I insist on this mechanism of contradiction in the biography of a writer . . . , it 
is because his train of thought cannot bypass certain facts which have a logic 
different from that of his thought by itself. It is because there is no idea he adheres 
to that truly holds up ... in the face of certain very simple, elemental facts : that 
workers are staring down the barrels of cannons aimed at them by police, that 
war is threatening, and that fascism is already enthroned. ... It behooves a man, 
for the sake of his dignity, to submit his ideas to these facts, and not to bend these 
facts, by some conjuring trick, to his ideas, however ingenious." Aragon, "D' Al- 
fred de Vigny a Avdeenko," Commune, 2 (April 20, 1935), pp. 808-809. But it is 
entirely possible that, in contradicting my past, I will establish a continuity with 
that of another, which he in turn, as communist, will contradict. In this case, with 
the past of Louis Aragon, who in this same essay disavows his Paysan de Paris: 
"And, like most of my friends, I was partial to the failures, to what is monstrous 
and cannot survive, cannot succeed. ... I was like them: I preferred error to its 
opposite" (p. 807). [N3a,4] 

In the dialectical image, what has been within a particular epoch is always, 
simultaneously, "what has been from time immemorial." As such, however, it is 
manifest, on each occasion, only to a quite specific epoch — namely, the one in 
which humanity, rubbing its eyes, recognizes just this particular dream image as 
such. It is at this moment that the historian takes up, with regard to that image, 
the task of dream interpretation. [N4,l] 

The expression "the book of nature" indicates that one can read the real like a 
text. And that is how the reality of the nineteenth century will be treated here. We 
open the book of what happened. [N4,2] 

Just as Proust begins the story of his life with an awakening, so must every 
presentation of history begin with awakening; in fact, it should treat of nothing 
else. This one, accordingly, deals with awakening from the nineteenth century. 

[N4,3] 

The realization of dream elements in the course of waking up is the canon of 
dialectics. It is paradigmatic for the thinker and binding for thehistorian. [N4,4] 

Raphael seeks to correct the Marxist conception of the normative character of 
Greek art: "If the normative character of Greek art is ... an explicable fact of 
history, ... we will have ... to determine . . . what special conditions led to each 
renascence and, in consequence, what special factors of . . . Greek art these 



renascences adopted as models. For the totality of Greek art never possessed a 
normative character; the renascences . . . have their own proper history. . . . Only 
a historical analysis can indicate the era in which the abstract notion of a 'norm' 
... of antiquity was born. . . . This notion was created solely by the Renais- 
sance — that is, by primitive capitalism — and subsequently taken up by classicism, 
which . . . commenced to assign it its place in a historical sequence. Marx has not 
advanced along this way in the full measure of the possibilities of historical 
materialism." Max Raphael, Proudhon, Marx, Picasso (Pans <1933>), pp. 178-179. 

[N4,5] 

It is the peculiarity of technological forms of production (as opposed to art forms) 
that their progress and their success are proportionate to the transparency of their 
social content. (Hence glass architecture.) [N4,6] 

An important passage in Marx: "It is recognized that where ... the epic, for 
example, ... is concerned, . . . certain significant creations within the compass of 
art are possible only at an early stage of artistic development. If this is the case 
with regard to different branches of art within the sphere of the arts, it is not so 
remarkable that this should also be die case with regard to the whole artistic 
realm and its relation to the general development of the society." Cited without 
references (perhaps Theorien des Mehrwerts, vol. 1 ?)" in Max Raphael, Proudhon, 
Marx, Picasso (Paris <1933>), p. 160. [N4 a ,l] 

The Marxian theory of art: one moment swaggering, and the next scholastic. 

[N4 a ,2] 

Proposal for a gradation of the superstructure, in A. Astnraro, II materialismo 
storico e la sociologia generate (Genoa, 1904) (reviewed by Erwin Szabo in Die 
neue Zeit, 23, no. 1 [Stuttgart], p. 62): "Economy. Family and kinship. Law. War. 
Politics. Morality. Religion. Art. Science." [N4 a ,3] 

Strange remark by Engels concerning the "social forces": "But when once their 
nature is understood, they can, in the hands of the producers working together, 
be transformed from master demons into willing servants." (!) Engels, Die 
Entwicklung des Soiialumus von der Utopie zur Wissenschaft (1882). lJ [N4 a ,4] 

Marx, in the afterword to the second edition of Das Kapital: "Research has to 
appropriate the material in detail, to analyze its various forms of development, to 
trace out their inner connection. Only after this work is done can the actual 
movement be presented in correspondingfashion. If this is done successfully, if the 
life of the material is reflected back as ideal, then it may appear as if we had before 
us an a priori construction." Karl Marx, Das Kapital, vol 1, ed. Korsch (Berlin 
<1932>), p. 45. 10 [N4 a ,5] 



The particular difficulty of doing historical research on the period following 
the close of the eighteenth century will be displayed. With the rise of the mass- 
circulation press, the sources become innumerable. [N4a,6] 



Michelet is perfectly willing to let the people he known as "barharians." "'Bar- 
barians.' I like the word, and I accept the term." And he says of their writers: 
"Their love is boundless and sometimes too great, for they may devote themselves 
to details with the delightful awkwardness of Albrecht Diirer, or with the excessive 
polish of Jean- Jacques Rousseau, who does not conceal his art enough; and by this 
minute detail they compromise the whole. We must not blame them too much. It is 
. . . the luxuriance of their sap and vigor. . . . This sap wants to give everything at 
once — leaves, fruit, and flowers; it bends and twists the branches. These defects of 
many great workers are often found in my books, which lack their good qualities. 
No matter!" J. Michelet, Le Peuple (Paris, 1846), pp. xxxvi-xxxvii." [N5,l] 

Letter from Wiesengrund of August 5, 1935: "The attempt to reconcile your 
'dream' momentum — as the subjective element in the dialectical image — with the 
conception of the latter as model has led me to some formulations . . . : With the 
■vitiation of their use value, the alienated things are hollowed out and, as ciphers, 
they draw in meanings. Subjectivity takes possession of them insofar as it invests 
them with intentions of desire and fear. And insofar as defunct things stand in as 
images of subjective intentions, these latter present themselves as immemorial 
and eternal. Dialectical images are constellated between alienated things and 
incoming and disappearing meaning, are instantiated in the moment of indiffer- 
ence between death and meaning. While things in appearance are awakened to 
what is newest, death transforms the meanings to what is most ancient." With 
regard to these reflections, it should be kept in mind that, in the nineteenth 
century, the number of "hollowed-out" things increases at a rate and on a scale 
that was previously unknown, for technical progress is continually withdrawing 
newly introduced objects from circulation. [N5,2] 

"The critic can start from any form of theoretical or practical consciousness, and 
develop out of the actual forms of existing reality the true reality as what it ought 
to be, that which is its aim." Karl Marx, Der hutoruche Materialumus: Die Friih- 
schriften, ed. Landshut and Mayer (Leipzig <1932>), vol. 1, p. 225 (letter from 
Marx to Ruge; Kreuzenach, September 1843). 12 The point of departure invoked 
here by Marx need not necessarily connect with the latest stage of development. 
It can be undertaken with regard to long-vanished epochs whose "ought to be" 
and whose aim is then to be presented — not in reference to the next stage of 
development, but in its own right and as preformation of the final goal of history. 

[N5,3] 

Engels says (Marx und Engels iiber Feuerbach: Aus dem Nachlass, Marx-Engels 
Archiv, ed. Rjazanov, vol. 1 [Frankfurt am Main <1928>], p. 300): "It must not be 
forgotten that law has just as little an independent history as religion." 13 What 



holds for law and religion holds for culture even more. It would be absurd for us 
to conceive of the classless society, its forms of existence, in the image of cultural 
humanity. [N5,4] 

"Our election cry must be: Reform of consciousness not through dogmas, but 
through the analysis of mystical consciousness that is unclear to itself, whether it 
appears in a religious or a political form. Then people will see that the world has 
long possessed the dream of a thing — and that it only needs to possess the con- 
sciousness of this thing in order really to possess it." Karl Marx, Der historische 
Muteriatismus: Die Friihschriften, ed. Landshut and Mayer (Leipzig <1932>), vol. 
1, pp. 226-227 (letter from Marx to Ruge; Kreuzenach, September 1843). 14 

[N5a,l] 

A reconciled humanity will take leave of its past — and one form of reconciliation 
is gaiety. "The present German regime . . . , the nullity of the ancien regime 
exhibited for all the world to see, ... is only the comedian of a world order whose 
real heroes are dead. History is thorough, and passes through many stages when 
she carries a worn-out form to burial. The last stage of a world-historical form is 
its comedy. The gods of Greece, who had already been mortally wounded in the 
Prometheus Bound of Aeschylus, had to die yet again — this time a comic death — in 
the dialogues of Lucian. Why does history follow this course? So that mankind 
may take leave of its past gaily." Karl Marx, Der historische Materialismus: Die 
Friihschriften, ed. Landshut and Mayer (Leipzig), vol. 1, pp. 268 ("Zur Kritik der 
Hegelschen Rechtsphilosophie").^' Surrealism is the death of the nineteenth century 
in comedy. [N5a,2] 

Marx (Marx unci Engels iiber Feuerbach: Aus demNachlass, Marx-Engels Archiv, 
vol. 1 [Frankfurt am Main <1928>], p. 3#1): "There is no history of politics, law, 
science, etc. , of art, religion, etc." 16 [N5a,3] 

Die heilige Familie, on the subject of Bacon's materialism: "Matter, surrounded 
by a sensuous poetic glamor, seems to attract man's whole entity with winning 
smiles." 17 [N5a,4] 

"1 regret having treated in only a very incomplete manner those facts of daily 
existence — food, clothing, shelter, family routines, civil law, recreation, social 
relations — which have always been of prime concern in the life of the great major- 
ity of individuals." Charles Seignohos, Histoire sincere de la nation francaise 
(Paris, 1933), p. xi. [N5a,5] 

Ad notam a formula of Valery's : "What distinguishes a truly general phenome- 
non is its fertility"" [N5a,6] 



Barbarism lurks in the very concept of culture — as the concept of a fund of values 
which is considered independent not, indeed, of the production process in which 



these values originated, but of the one in which they survive. In this way they 
serve the apotheosis of the latter <word uncertain>, barbaric as it may be. 

[N5a,7] 

To determine how the concept of culture arose, what meaning it has had in 
different periods, and what needs its institution corresponded to. It could, insofar 
as it signifies the sum of "cultural riches," turn out to be of recent origin; certainly 
it is not yet found, for example, in the cleric of the early Middle Ages who waged 
his war of annihilation against the teachings of antiquity. [N6,l] 

Michelet — an author who, wherever he is quoted, makes the reader forget the 
book in which the quotation appears. [N6,2] 

To be underlined: the painstaking delineation of the scene in the first writings on 
social problems and charity, like Naville, De la Charite legale; Fregier, Des Classes 
dangereuses; and various others. [N6,3] 

"I cannot insist too strongly on the fact that, for an enlightened materialist like 
Lafargue, economic determinism is not the 'absolutely perfect instrument' which 
'can provide the key to all the problems of history.'" Andre Breton, Position 
politique du surrealisme (Paris <1935>), pp. 8-9. [N6,4] 

All historical knowledge can be represented in the image of balanced scales, one 
tray of which is weighted with what has been and the other widi knowledge of 
what is present. Whereas on the first the facts assembled can never be too 
humble or too numerous, on the second there can be only a few heavy, massive 
weights. [N6,5] 

"The only attitude worthy of philosophy ... in the industrial era is . . . restraint. 
The 'scientificity' of a Marx does not mean that philosophy renounces its task . . . ; 
rather, it indicates that philosophy holds itself in reserve until the predominance 
of an unworthy reality is broken." Hugo Fischer, Km.rl Mmrx und sein Verhdltnis 
zu Staat und Wirtschaft (Jena, 1932), p. 59. [N6,6] 

It is not without significance that Engels, in the context of die materialist concep- 
tion of history, lays emphasis on classicality. For the demonstration of the dialec- 
tic of development, he refers to laws "which the actual historical process itself 
provides, insofar as every momentum can be considered to be at the point of its 
full ripening, its classicality." Cited in Gustav Mayer, Friedrich Engels, vol. 2, 
Engels und der Aufstieg der Arbeiterbewegung in Europa (Berlin <1933>), pp. 434- 
435. [N6,7] 



Engels in a letter to Mehring, July 14, 1893: "It is above all this semblance of an 
independent history of state constitutions, of systems of law, of ideological concep- 
tions in every separate domain, that dazzles most people. If Luther and Calvin 



'overcome' the official Catholic religion, or Hegel 'overcomes' Fichte and Kant, or 
Rousseau with his republican Contrat social indirectly 'overcomes' the constitu- 
tional Montesquieu, this is a process which remains within theology, philosophy, 
or political science, represents a stage in the history of these particular spheres of 
thought and never passes heyond the sphere of thought. And since the hourgeois 
illusion of the eternity and finality of capitalist production has been added to this, 
even the overcoming of the mercantilists by the physiocrats and Adam Smith is 
regarded as a sheer victory of thought; not as the reflection in thought of changed 
economic facts, but as the finally achieved correct understanding of actual condi- 
tions subsisting always and everywhere." 19 Cited in Gustav Mayer, Friedrich 
Engels, vol. 2, Engels und der Aufstieg der Arbeiterbeivegung in Europa (Berlin), 
pp. 450-451. [N6a,l] 



"What Schlosser could say in response to these reproaches [of peevish moral 
rigor], and what he ivould say, is this: that history and life in general, unlike 
novels and stories, do not teach a lesson of superficial joie de vivre, even to the 
happily constituted spirit and senses; that the contemplation of history is more 
likely to inspire, if not contempt for humanity, then a somher vision of the world 
and strict principles for living; that, at least on the very greatest judges of the 
world and humankind, on men who knew how to measure outward affairs by their 
own inner life, on a Shakespeare, Dante, or Machiavelli, the way of the world 
always made the sort of impression that conduces to seriousness and severity." 
G. G. Gervinus, Friedrich Christoph Schlosser (Leipzig, 1861), in Deutsche Denk- 
reden, ed. Rudolf Borchardt (Munich, 1925), p. 312. [N6a,2] 

The relation of tradition to the technology of reproduction deserves to he stud- 
ied. "Traditions . . . relate to written communications, in general, as reproduction 
of the latter by pen relates to reproduction by the press, as successive copies of a 
book relate to its simultaneous printings." Carl Gustav Jochmarm, Ueber die 
Sprache (Heidelberg, 1828), pp. 259-260 ("Die Riickschritte der Poesie"). 20 

[N6a,3] 

Roger Caillois, "Paris, mythe moderne" {Nouvelle Revue frangaue, 25, no. 284 
[May 1, 1937], p. 699), gives a list of the investigations that one would have to 
undertake in order to illuminate the subject further. (1) Descriptions of Paris that 
antedate the nineteenth century (Marivaux, Restif de La Bretonne); (2) the strug- 
gle between Girondists and Jacobins over the relation of Paris to the provinces; 
the legend of the days of revolution in Paris; (3) secret police under the Empire 
and the Restoration; (4) peinture morale of Paris in Hugo, Balzac, Baudelaire; (5) 
objective descriptions of the city: Dulaure, Du Camp; (6) Vigny, Hugo (Paris 
aflame in L'Annee terrible), Rimbaud. [N7,l] 

Still to be established is the connection between presence of mind and the 
"method" of dialectical materialism. It's not just that one will always be able to 
detect a dialectical process in presence of mind, regarded as one of the highest 



forms of appropriate behavior. What is even more decisive is that the dialectician 
cannot look, on history as anything other than a constellation of dangers which 
he is always, as he follows its development in his thought, on the point of 
averting. [N7,2] 

"Revolution is a drama perhaps more than a history, and its pathos is a condition 
as imperious as its authenticity." Blanqui, cited in Geffroy, L'Enferme (Paris, 
1926), vol. 1, p. 232. [N7,3] 

Necessity of paying heed over many years to every casual citation, every fleeting 
mention of a book. [N7,4] 

To contrast the theory of history with the observation by Grillparzer which 
Edmondjaloux translates in 'Joumaux intimes" (Le Temps, May 23, 1937): "To 
read into the future is difficult, but to see purely into the past is more difficult still. 
I say purely, that is, without involving in this retrospective glance anything that 
has taken place in the meantime." The "purity" of the gaze is not just difficult but 
impossible to attain. [N7,5] 

It is important for the materialist historian, in the most rigorous way possible, to 
differentiate the construction of a historical state of affairs from what one custom- 
arily calls its "reconstruction." The "reconstruction" in empathy is one-dimen- 
sional. "Construction" presupposes "destruction." [N7,6] 

In order for a part of the past to be touched by the present instant <Aktualitdt>, 
there must be no continuity between them. [N7,7] 

The fore- and after-history of a historical phenomenon show up in the phenome- 
non itself on the strength of its dialectical presentation. What is more: every 
dialectically presented historical circumstance polarizes itself and becomes a force 
field in which the confrontation between its fore-history and after-history is 
played out. It hecomes such a field insofar as the present instant interpenetrates it. 
<See N7a, 8.> And thus the historical evidence polarizes into fore- and after-his- 
tory always anew, never in the same way. And it does so at a distance from its 
own existence, in the present instant itself — like a line which, divided according 
to the Apollonian section, 21 experiences its partition from outside itself. [N7 a ,l] 

Historical materialism aspires to neither a homogeneous nor a continuous expo- 
sition of history. From the fact that the superstructure reacts upon the base, it 
follows that a homogeneous history, say, of economics exists as little as a homoge- 
neous history of literature or of jurisprudence. On the other hand, since the 
different epochs of the past are not all touched in the same degree by the present 
day of the historian (and often the recent past is not touched at all; the present 
fails to "do it justice"), continuity in the presentation of history is unattainable. 

[N7a,2] 



Telescoping of the past through the present. 



[N7a,3] 



The reception of great, much admired works of art is an ad plures ire.- 2 lN7a,4] 

The materialist presentation of history leads the past to bring the present into a 
critical state. lN7a,5] 

It is my intention to withstand what "Valery calls "a reading slowed by and 
bristling with the resistances of a refined and fastidious reader." Charles Baude- 
laire, Les Flews du mal, Introduction by Paul "Valery (Paris, 1928), p. xiii. 23 

[N7a,6] 

My drinking is related to theology as blotting pad is related to ink. It is saturated 
with it. Were one to go by the blotter, however, nothing of what is written would 
remain. [N7a,7] 

It is the present that polarizes the event into fore- and after-history. [N7a,8] 

On the question of the incompleteness of history, Horkheimer's letter of March 
16, 1937: "The determination of incompleteness is idealistic if completeness is 
not comprised within it. Past injustice has occurred and is completed. The slain 
are really slain. ... If one takes the lack of closure entirely seriously, one must 
believe in the Last Judgment. . . . Perhaps, with regard to incompleteness, there is 
a difference between the positive and the negative, so that only the injustice, the 
horror, the sufferings of the past are irreparable. The justice practiced, the joys, 
the works, have a different relation to time, for their positive character is largely 
negated by the transience of things. This holds first and foremost for individual 
existence, in which it is not the happiness but the unhappiness that is sealed by 
death." The corrective to this line of thinking may be found in the consideration 
that history is not simply a science but also and not least a form of remembrance 
<Eingedenken>. What science has "determined," remembrance can modify. Such 
mindfulness can make the incomplete (happiness) into something complete, and 
the complete (suffering) into something incomplete. That is theology; but in 
remembrance we have an experience that forbids us to conceive of history as 
fundamentally atheological, little as it may be granted us to try to write it with 
inmiediately theological concepts. [N8,l] 

The unequivocally regressive function which the doctrine of archaic images has 
for Jung comes to light in the following passage from the essay "Uber die Bezie- 
hungen der analytischen Psychologie zum dichterischen Kunstwerk": "The crea- 
tive process . . . consists in an unconscious activation of the archetype and in an 
. . . elaboration of this original image into the finished work. By giving it shape, 
the artist in some measure translates this image into the language of the pre- 
sent. . . . Therein lies the social significance of art: ... it conjures up the forms in 
which the Zeitgeist, the spirit of the age, is most lacking. The unsatisfied yearning 



of the artist reaches back to the primordial image in the unconscious which is best 
fitted to compensate the . . . one-sidedness of the spirit of the age. This image his 
longing seizes on, and as he . . . brings it to consciousness, the image changes its 
form until it can be accepted by the minds of his contemporaries, according to 
their powers." C. G. Jung, Seelenprobleme der Gegenwart (Zurich, Leipzig, and 
Stuttgart, 1932), p. 7l. n Thus, the esoteric theory of art comes down to making 
archetypes "accessible" to the "Zeitgeist." [N8,2] 

In Jung's production there is a belated and particularly emphatic elaboration of 
one of the elements which, as we can recognize today, were first disclosed in 
explosive fashion by Expressionism. That element is a specifically clinical nihil- 
ism, such as one encounters also in the works of Benn, and which has found a 
camp follower in Celine. This nihilism is born of the shock imparted by the 
interior of the body to those who treat it. Jung himself traces the heightened 
interest in psychic life back to Expressionism. He writes: "Art has a way of 
anticipating future changes in man's fundamental outlook, and expressionist art 
has taken this subjective turn well in advance of the more general change." See 
Seelenprobleme der Gegenwart (Zurich, Leipzig, and Stuttgart, 1932), p. 415 — 
"Das Seelenproblem des modernen Menschen"). 25 In this regard, we should not 
lose sight of the relations which Lukacs has established between Expressionism 
and Fascism. (See also K7a,4.) [N8a,l] 

"Tradition, errant fable one collects, / Intermittent as the wind in the leaves." 
Victor Hugo, La Fin de Satan (Paris, 1886), p. 235. [N8a,2] 

Julien Benda, in Un Regulier dans le siecle, cites a phrase from Fustel de Cou- 
langes : "If you want to relive an epoch, forget that you know what has come af ter 
it." That is the secret Magna Charta for the presentation of history by the 
Historical School, and it carries little conviction when Benda adds: "Fustel never 
said that these measures were valid for understanding the role of an epoch in 
history." [N8a,3] 

Pursue the question of whether a connection exists between the secularization of 
time in space and the allegorical mode of perception. The former, at any rate (as 
becomes clear in Blanqui's last writing), is hidden in the "worldview of the 
natural sciences" of the second half of the century. (Secularization of history in 
Heidegger.) 20 [N8a,4] 

Goethe saw it coming: the crisis in bourgeois education. Pie confronts it in 
Wilhelm Meuter. Pie characterizes it in his correspondence with Zelter. [N8a,5] 

Wilhelm von Plumboldt shifts the center of gravity to languages; Marx and 
Engels shift it to the natural sciences. But the study of languages has economic 
functions, too. It comes up against global economics, as the study of natural 
sciences comes up against the production process. [N9,l] 



Scientific method is distinguished by the fact that, in leading to new objects, it 
develops new methods. Just as form in art is distinguished by the fact that, 
opening up new contents, it develops new forms. It is only from without that a 
work of art has one and only one form, that a treatise has one and only one 
method. [N9,2] 

On the concept of "rescue": the wind of the absolute in the sails of the concept. 
(The principle of the wind is the cyclical.) The trim of the sails is the relative. 

[N9.3] 

What are phenomena rescued from? Not only, and not in the main, from the 
discredit and neglect into which they have fallen, but from the catastrophe repre- 
sented very often by a certain strain in their dissemination, their "enshrinement 
as heritage." — They are saved through the exhibition of the fissure within 
them. — There is a tradition that is catastrophe. [N9,4] 

It is the inherent tendency of dialectical experience to dissipate the semblance of 
eternal sameness, and even of repetition, in history. Authentic political experi- 
ence is absolutely free of this semblance. [N9,5] 

What matters for the dialectician is to have the wind of world history in his sails. 
Thinkirg means for him; setting the sails. What is important is how they are set. 
Words are his sails. The way they are set makes them into concepts. [N9,6] 

The dialectical image is an image that emerges suddenly, in a flash. What has 
been is to be held fast — as an image flashing up in the now of its recognizability. 
The rescue that is carried out by these means — and only by these — can operate 
solely for the sake of what in the next moment is already irretrievably lost. In this 
connection, see the metaphorical passage from my introduction to Jochmarm, 
concerning the prophetic gaze that catches fire from the summits of the past.' 27 

[N9.7] 

Being a dialectician means having the wind of history in one's sails. The sails are 
the concepts. It is not enough, however, to have sails at one's disposal. What is 
decisive is knowing the art of setting them. [N9,8] 

The concept of progress must be grounded in the idea of catastrophe. That 
things are "status quo" is the catastrophe. It is not an ever-present possibility but 
what in each case is given. Thus Strindberg (in To Damascus?): 2 * hell is not 
something that awaits us, but this life here and now. [N9a,l] 

It is good to give materialist investigations a truncated ending. [N9a,2] 



To the process of rescue belongs the firm, seemingly brutal grasp. 



[N9a,3] 



The dialectical image is that form of the historical object which satisfies Goethe's 
requirements for the object of analysis: to exhibit a genuine synthesis. It is the 
primal phenomenon of history. [N9a,4] 



The enshrinement or apologia is meant to cover up the revolutionary moments 
in the occurrence of history At heart, it seeks the establishment of a continuity. It 
sets store only by those elements of a work that have already emerged and played 
a part in its reception. The places where tradition breaks off — hence its peaks and 
crags, which offer footing to one who would cross over them — it misses. 

[N9a,5] 

Historical materialism must renounce the epic element in history. It blasts the 
epoch out of the reifi ed "continuity of history." But it also explodes the homoge- 
neity of the epoch, interspersing it with ruins — that is, with the present. [N9a,6] 

In every true work of art there is a place where, for one who removes there, it 
blows cool like the wind of a coming dawn. From this it follows that art, which 
has often been considered refractory to every relation with progress, can provide 
its true definition. Progress has its seat not in the continuity of elapsing time but 
in its interferences — where the truly new makes itself felt for the first time, with 
the sobriety of dawn. [N9a,7] 

For the materialist historian, every epoch with which he occupies himself is only 
prehistory for the epoch he himself must live in. And so, for him, there can be no 
appearance of repetition in history, since precisely those moments in the course 
of history which matter most to him, by virtue of their index as "fore-history," 
become moments of the present day and change their specific character accord- 
ing to the catastrophic or triumphant nature of that day. [N9a,8] 

Scientific progress — like historical progress — is in each instance merely the first 
step, never the second, third, or n + 1 — supposing that these latter ever belonged 
not just to the workshop of science but to its corpus. That, however, is not in fact 
the case; for every stage in the dialectical process (like every stage in the process 
of history itself), conditioned as it always is by every stage preceding, brings into 
play a fundamentally new tendency, which necessitates a fundamentally new 
treatment. The dialectical method is thus distinguished by the fact that, in leading 
to new objects, it develops new methods, just as form in art is distinguished by 
the fact that it develops new forms in delineating new contents. It is only from 
without that a work of art has one and only one form, that a dialectical treatise has 
one and only one method. [N10.1] 



Definitions of basic historical concepts: Catastrophe — to have missed the oppor- 
tunity. Critical moment — the status quo threatens to be preserved. Progress — the 
first revolutionary measure taken. [ N 1 0 , 2] 



If the object of history is to be blasted out of the continuum of historical succes- 
sion, that is because its monadological structure demands it. This structure first 
comes to light in the extracted object itself. And it does so in the form of the 
historical confrontation that makes up the interior (and, as it were, the bowels) of 
the historical object, and into which all the forces and interests of history enter on 
a reduced scale. It is owing to this monadological structure that the historical 
object finds represented in its interior its own fore-history and after-history. 
(Thus, for example, the fore-history of Baudelaire, as educed by current scholar- 
ship, resides in allegory; his after-history, injugendstil.) [N10,3] 

Forming the basis of the confrontation with conventional historiography and 
"enshrinement" is the polemic against empathy (Grillparzer, Fustel de Cou- 
langes). [N10.4] 

The Saint-Simonian Barrault distinguishes between epoques organiques and e'po- 
ques critiques. <See U15a,4.> The derogation of the critical spirit begins directly 
after the victory of the bourgeoisie in the July Revolution. [N10,5] 

The destructive or critical momentum of materialist historiography is registered 
in that blasting of historical continuity with which the historical object first consti- 
tutes itself. In fact, an object of history cannot be targeted at all within the 
continuous elapse of history. And so, from time immemorial, historical narration 
has simply picked out an object from this continuous succession. But it has done 
so without foundation, as an expedient; and its first thought was then always to 
reinsert the object into the continuum, which it would create anew tlirough 
empathy. Materialist historiography does not choose its objects arbitrarily. It 
does not fasten on them but rather springs them loose from the order of succes- 
sion. Its provisions are more extensive, its occurrences more essential. [NlOa.l] 

[For] the destructive momentum in materialist historiography is to be conceived 
as the reaction to a constellation of dangers, which tlireatens both the burden of 
tradition and those who receive it. It is this constellation of dangers which the 
materialist presentation of history comes to engage. In this constellation is com- 
prised its actuality; against its threat, it must prove its presence of mind. Such a 
presentation of history has as goal to pass, as Engels puts it, "beyond the sphere 
of thought." 29 [N10a,2] 

To thinking belongs the movement as well as the arrest of thoughts. Where 
drinking comes to a standstill in a constellation saturated with tensions — there 
the dialectical image appears. It is the caesura in the movement of thought. Its 
position is naturally not an arbitrary one. It is to be found, in a word, where the 
tension between dialectical opposites is greatest. Hence, the object constructed in 
the materialist presentation of history is itself the dialectical image. The latter is 
identical with the historical object; it justifies its violent expulsion from the con- 
tinuum of historical process. [N10a,3] 



The archaic form of primal history, which has been summoned up in every 
epoch and now once more by Jung, is that form which makes semblance in 
history still more delusive by mandating nature as its homeland. [Nl 1,1] 

To write history means giving dates their physiognomy. [Nl 1,2] 

The events surrounding the historian, and in which he himself takes part, will 
underlie his presentation in the form of a text written in invisible ink. The history 
which he lays before the reader comprises, as it were, the citations occurring in 
this text, and it is only these citations that occur in a manner legible to all. To 
write history thus means to cite histoiy. It belongs to the concept of citation, 
however, that the historical object in each case is torn from its context. [Nil, 3] 

On the elementary doctrine of historical materialism. (1) An object of history is 
that through which knowledge is constituted as the object's rescue. (2) History 
decays into images, not into stories. (3) Wherever a dialectical process is realized, 
we are dealing with a monad. (4) The materialist presentation of history carries 
along with it an immanent critique of the concept of progress. (5) Historical 
materialism bases its procedures on long experience, common sense, presence of 
mind, and dialectics. (On the monad: Nl0a,3.) [Nil, 4] 

The present determines where, in the object from the past, that object's fore- 
history and after-history diverge so as to circumscribe its nucleus. [Nil, 5] 

To prove by example that only Marxism can practice great philology, where the 
literature of the previous century is concerned. [Nil, 6] 

"The regions which were the first to become enlightened are not those where the 
sciences have made the greatest progress." Turgot, Oeuvres, vol. 2 (Paris, 1844), 
pp. 601-602 ("Second discours sur les progres successifs de l'esprit humain"). 30 
The thought is taken up in the later literature, and also in Marx. [Nil, 7] 

In the course of the nineteenth century, as the bourgeoisie consolidated its posi- 
tions of power, the concept of progress would increasingly have forfeited the 
critical functions it originally possessed. (In this process, the doctrine of natural 
selection had a decisive role to play: it popularized the notion that progress was 
automatic. The extension of the concept of progress to the whole of human 
activity was furthered as a result.) With Turgot, the concept of progress still had 
its critical functions. In particular, the concept made it possible to direct people's 
attention to retrograde tendencies in history. Turgot saw progress, charac- 
teristically, as guaranteed above all in the realm of mathematical research. 

[Nlla.l] 

"But what a spectacle the succession of men's opinions presents! There I seek the 
progress of the human mind, and I find virtually nothing hut the history of its 
errors. Why is its course — which is so sure, from the very first steps, in the field of 



mathematical studies — so unsteady in everything else, and so apt to go astray? . . . 
In this slow progression of opinions and errors, ... I fancy that I see those first 
leaves, those sheaths which nature has given to the newly growing stems of plants, 
issuing before them from the earth, and withering one by one as other sheaths 
come into existence, until at last the stem itself makes its appearance and 
is crowned with flowers and fruit — a symbol of late-emerging truth." Turgot, 
Oeuvres, vol. 2 (Paris, 1844), pp. 600-601 ("Second discours sur les progres sue- 
cessifs de l'esprit humain"). ;!1 [Nlla,2] 

A limes to progress still exists in Turgot: "In later times, ... it was necessary for 
them, through reflection, to take themselves back to where the first men had been 
led by blind instinct. And who is not aware that it is here that the supreme effort 
of reason lies?" Turgot, Oeuvres, vol. 2, p. 610. 32 This limit is still present in Marx; 
later it is lost. [Nlla,3] 

Already with Turgot it is evident that the concept of progress is oriented toward 
science, but has its corrective in art. (At bottom, not even art can be ranged 
exclusively under the concept of regression; neither does Jochmann's essay de- 
velop this concept in an unqualified way.) Of course, Turgot's estimate of art is 
different from what ours would be today. "Knowledge of nature and of truth is as 
infinite as they are; the arts, whose aim is to please us, are as limited as we are. 
Time constantly brings to light new discoveries in the sciences; but poetry, paint- 
ing, and music have a fixed limit which the genius of languages, the imitation of 
nature, and the limited sensibility of our organs determine. . . . The great men of 
the Augustan age reached it, and are still our models." Turgot, Oeuvres, vol. 2 
(Paris, 1844), pp. 605-606 ("Second discours sur les progres successifs de l'esprit 
humain"). 33 Thus a programmatic renunciation of originality in art! [N12.1] 

"There are elements of the arts of taste which could be perfected with time — for 
example, perspective, which depends on optics. But local color, the imitation of 
nature, and the expression of the passions are of all times. 1 ' Turgot, Oeuvres, vol. 
2 (Paris, 1844), p. 658 ("Plan du second discours sur l'histoire universelle"). 3 ' 1 

[N12.2] 

Militant representation of progress: "It is not error that is opposed to the progress 
of truth; it is indolence, obstinacy, the spirit of routine, everything that contrib- 
utes to inaction. — The progress of even the most peaceful of arts among the 
ancient peoples of Greece and their republics was punctuated by continual wars. 
It was like the Jews' building the walls of Jerusalem with one hand while defend- 
ing them with the other. Their spirits were always in ferment, their hearts always 
high with adventure; and each day was a further enlightenment." Turgot, 
Oeuvres, vol. 2 (Paris, 1844), pp. 672 ("Pensees et fragments"). [N12.3] 

Presence of mind as a political category comes magnificently to life in these 
words of Tirgot: "Before we have learned to deal with things in a given position, 
they have already changed several times. Thus, we always perceive events too 



late, and politics always needs to foresee, so to speak, the present." Turgot, 
Oeuvres, vol. 2 (Paris, 1844), p. 673 ("Pensees et fragments"). 35 [N12a,l] 



"The . . . radically altered landscape of the nineteenth century remains visible to 
this clay, at least in traces. It was shaped by the railroads. . . . The focal points of 
this historical landscape are present wherever mountain and tunnel, canyon and 
viaduct, torrent and funicular, river and iron bridge . . . reveal their kinship. . . . 
In all their singularity, these things announce that nature has not withdrawn, amid 
the triumph of technological civilization, into the nameless and inchoate, that the 
pure construction of bridge or tunnel did not in itself . . . usurp the landscape, hut 
that river and mountain at once took their side, and not as subjugated adversaries 
but as friendly powers. . . . The iron locomotive that disappears into the mountain 
tunnel . . . seems ... to be returning to its native element, where the raw material 
out of which it was made lies slumbering." Dolf Sternberger, Panorama, oder 
Ansichten vom 19. Jahrhundert (Hamburg, 1938), pp. 34—35. [N12a,2] 

The concept of progress had to run counter to the critical theory of history from 
the moment it ceased to be applied as a criterion to specific historical develop- 
ments and instead was required to measure the span between a legendary incep- 
tion and a legendary end of history. In other words: as soon as it becomes the 
signature of historical process as a whole, the concept of progress bespeaks an 
uncritical hypostatization rather than a critical interrogation. This latter may be 
recognized, in the concrete exposition of history, from the fact that it outlines 
regression at least as sharply as it brings any progress into view. (Thus Turgot, 
Jochmann.) [N13,l] 

Lotze as critic of the concept of progress: "In opposition to the readily accepted 
doctrine that the progress of humanity is ever onward and upward, more cau- 
tious reflection has been forced to make the discovery that the course of history 
takes the form of spirals — some prefer to say epicycloids. In short, there has 
never been a dearth of thoughtful but veiled acknowledgments that the impres- 
sion produced by history on the whole, far from being one of unalloyed exulta- 
tion, is preponderantly melancholy. Unprejudiced consideration will always 
lament and wonder to see how many advantages of civilization and special 
charms of life are lost, never to reappear in their integrity." Hermann Lotze, 
Mikrokosmos, vol. 3 (Leipzig, 1864), p. 21. 36 [N13.2] 

Lotze as critic of the concept of progress: "It is not . . . clear how we are to 
imagine one course of education as applying to successive generations of men, 
allowing the later of these to partake of the fruits produced by the unrewarded 
efforts and often by the misery of those who went before. To hold that the claims 
of particular times and individual men may be scorned and all their misfortunes 
disregarded if only mankind would improve overall is, though suggested by 
noble feelings, merely enthusiastic thoughtlessness. . . . Nothing is progress 
which does not mean an increase of happiness and perfection for those very souls 



which had suffered in a previous imperfect state." Hermann Lotze, Mikrokosmos, 
vol. 3 (Leipzig, 1864), p. 23. 37 If the idea of progress extended over the totality of 
recorded history is something peculiar to the satiated bourgeoisie, then Lotze 
represents the reserves called up by those on the defensive. But contrast Holder- 
lin: "I love the race of men who are coming in the next centuries." 38 [N13,3] 

A thought-provoking observation: "It is one of the most noteworthy peculiarities 
of the human heart . . . that so much selfishness in individuals coexists with the 
general lack of envy which every present day feels toward its future." This lack of 
envy indicates that the idea we have of happiness is deeply colored by the time in 
which we live. Happiness for us is thinkable only in the air that we have 
breathed, among the people who have lived with us. In other words, there 
vibrates in the idea of happiness (this is what that noteworthy circumstance 
teaches us) the idea of salvation. This happiness is founded on the very despair 
and desolation which were ours. Our life, it can be said, is a muscle strong 
enough to contract the whole of historical time. Or, to put it differently, the 
genuine conception of historical time rests entirely upon the image of redemp- 
tion. (The passage is from Lotze, Mikrokosmos, vol. 3 [Leipzig, 1864], p. 49.) 39 

[Nl3a,l] 

■enial of the notion of progress in the religious view of history: "History, how- 
ever it may move forward or fluctuate hither and thither, could not by any of its 
movements attain a goal lying out of its own plane. And we may spare ourselves 
the trouble of seeking to find, in mere onward movement upon this plane, a 
progress which history is destined to make not there but by an upward move- 
ment at each individual point of its course forward." Hermann Lotze, Mikrokos- 
mos, vol. 3 (Leipzig, 1864), p. 49. 40 [N13a,2] 

Connection, in Lotze, between the idea of progress and the idea of redemption: 
"The reason of the world would be turned to unreason if we did not reject the 
thought that the work of vanishing generations should go on forever benefiting 
only those who come later, and being irreparably wasted for the workers them- 
selves" (p. 50). This cannot be, "unless the world itself, and all the flourish about 
historical development, are to appear as mere vain and unintelligible noise. . . . 
Tbat in some mysterious way the progress of history affects them, too — it is this 
conviction that first entitles us to speak as we do of humanity and its history" 
(p. 51). Lotze calls this the "thought of the preservation and restoration of all 
things" (p. 52). 41 [Nl3a,3] 

Cultural history, according to Bernheim, developed out of the positivism of 
Comte; Beloch's Greek History (<vol. 1,> 2nd edition, 1912) is, according to him, a 
textbook example of Comtean influence. Positivist historiography "disregarded 
. . . the state and political processes, and saw in the collective intellectual develop- 
ment of society the sole content of history. . . . The elevation ... of cultural 
history to the only subject worthy of historical research!" Ernst Bernheim, Mit- 



telalterliche Z e ^ ansc ^ auun E, en zw H irem Einfluss auf Politik und Geschichtsschreibung 
(Tubingen, 1918), p. 8. [N14,l] 



'"The logical category of time does not govern the verb as much as one might 
expect.' Strange as it may seem, the expression of the future does not appear to be 
situated on the same level of the human mind as the expression of the past and of 
the present. . . . 'The future often has no expression of its own; or if it has one, it is 
a complicated expression without parallel to that of the present or the past.' . . . 
'There is no reason to believe that prehistoric Indo-European ever possessed a 
true future tense' (Meillet)." Jean-Richard Bloch, "Langage d'utilite, langage 
poetique" (Encyclopediefranqaise, vol. 16 [16-50], 10). [N14.2] 

Simmel touches on a very important matter with the distinction between the 
concept of culture and the spheres of autonomy in classical Idealism. The separa- 
tion of the three autonomous domains from one another preserved classical 
Idealism from the concept of culture that has so favored the cause of barbarism. 
Simmel says of the cultural ideal: "It is essential that the independent values of 
aesthetic, scientific, ethical, . . . and even religious achievements be transcended, 
so that they can all be integrated as elements in the development of human 
nature beyond its natural state." Georg Simmel, Philosophie des Geldes (Leipzig, 
1900), pp. 476-477." ' [N14.3] 

"There has never been a period of history in which the culture peculiar to it has 
leavened the whole of humanity, or even the whole of that one nation which was 
specially distinguished by it. All degrees and shades of moral barbarism, of mental 
obtuseness, and of physical wretchedness have always been found in juxtaposition 
with cultured refinement of life . . . and free participation in the benefits of civil 
order." Hermann Lotze, Mikrokosmos, vol. 3 (Leipzig, 1864), pp. 23-24. 11 

[N14a,l] 

To the view that "there is progress enough if , . . . while the mass of mankind 
remains mired in an uncivilized condition, the civilization of a small minority is 
constantly struggling upward to greater and greater heights," Lotze responds with 
the question: "How, upon such assumptions, can we be entitled to speak of one 
history of mankind?" Lotze, Mikrokosmos, vol. 3, p. 25. 14 [N14a,2] 

"The way in which the culture of past times is for the most part handed down," 
Lotze says, "leads directly back to the very opposite of that at which historical 
development should aim; it leads, that is, to the formation of an instinct of culture, 
which continually takes up more and more of the elements of civilization, thus 
making them a lifeless possession, and withdrawing them from the sphere of that 
conscious activity hy the efforts of which they were at first obtained" (p. 28). 
Accordingly: "The progress of science is not . . . , directly, human progress; it 
would be this if, in proportion to the increase in accumulated truths, there were 



also an increase in men's concern for them . . . and in the clearness of their insight 
concerning them." Lotze, Mikrohosmos, vol. 3, p. 29. 15 [N14a,3] 



Lotze on humanity: "It cannot be said that men grow to what they are with a 
consciousness of this growth, and with an accompanying remembrance of their 
previous condition." Lotze, Mikrokosmos, vol. 3, p. 31. 10 [N14a,4] 

Lotze's vision of history can be related to Stifter's: "that the unruly will of the 
individual is always restricted in its action by universal conditions not subject to 
arbitrary will — conditions which are to be found in the laws of spiritual life in 
general, in the established order of nature . . . "Lotze, Mikrokosmos, vol. 3, p. 34." 

[N14 a ,5] 

To be compared with Stifter's preface to Bunte Steine <Colored Stones>: "Let us at 
the outset regard it as certain that a great effect is always due to a great cause, 
never to a small one." Histoire de Jules Cesar, vol. 1 (Paris, 1865) (Napoleon III). 

[N14 a ,6] 

A phrase which Baudelaire coins for the consciousness of time peculiar to some- 
one intoxicated by hashish can be applied in the definition of a revolutionary 
historical consciousness. He speaks of a night in which he was absorbed by the 
effects of hashish: "Long though it seemed to have been . . . , yet it also seemed to 
have lasted only a few seconds, or even to have had no place in all eternity." 
<Baudelaire, Oeuvres, ed. Le Dantec (Paris, 1931 ),> vol. 1, pp. 298-299." 

[N15.1] 

At any given time, the living see themselves in the midday of history. They are 
obliged to prepare a banquet for the past. The historian is the herald who invites 
the dead to the table. [N15,2] 

On the dietetics of historical literature. The contemporary who learns from 
books of history to recognize how long his present misery has been in prepara- 
tion (and this is what the historian must inwardly aim to show him) acquires 
thereby a high opinion of his own powers. A history that provides this kind of 
instruction does not cause him sorrow, but arms him. Nor does such a history 
arise from sorrow, unlike that which Flaubert had in mind when he penned the 
confession: "Few will suspect how depressed one had to be to undertake the 
resuscitation of Carthage."' 19 It is pure curiosite that arises from and deepens 
sorrow. [N15,3] 

Example of a "cultural historical" perspective in the worse sense. Huizinga 
speaks of the consideration displayed for the life of the common people in the 
pastorals of the late Middle Ages. "Here, too, belongs that interest in rags and 
tatters which ... is already beginning to make itself felt. Calendar miniatures 
note with pleasure the threadbare knees of reapers in the field, while paintings 



accentuate the rags of mendicants. . . . Here begins the line that leads through 
Rembrandt's etchings and Murillo's beggar boys to the street types of Steinlen." 
J. Huizinga, Herbst des Mittelalters (Munich, 1928), p. 448. 50 At issue, of course, is 
actually a very specific phenomenon. [Nl 5 ,4] 

"The past has left images of itself in literary texts, images comparahle to those 
which are imprinted by light on a photosensitive plate. The future alone possesses 
developers active enough to scan such surfaces perfectly. Many pages in Marivaux 
or Rousseau contain a mysterious meaning which the first readers of these texts 
could not fully have deciphered." Andre Monglond, Le Preromantismefranqmis, 
vol. 1, Le litres preromantique (Grenohle, 1930), p. xii. [N15a,l] 

A revealing vision of progress in Hugo, "Paris incendie" (L'Anne'e terrible) : 

What! Sacrifice everything! Even the granary! 
What! The library, arch where dawn arises, 
Unfathomable ABC of the ideal, where progress, 

Eternal reader, leans on its elbows and dreams . . . [N15a,2] 

On the style one should strive for: "It is through everyday words that style bites 
into and penetrates the reader. It is through them that great thoughts circulate 
and are accepted as genuine, like gold or silver imprinted with a recognized seal. 
They inspire confidence in the person who uses them to make his droughts more 
understandable; for one recognizes by such usage of common language a man 
who knows life and the world, and who stays in touch with things. Moreover, 
these words make for a frank style. They show that the author has long rumi- 
nated the thought or the feeling expressed, that he has made them so much his 
own, so much a matter of habit, that for him the most common expressions 
suffice to express ideas that have become natural to him after long deliberation. 
In the end, what one says in this way will appear more truthful, for nothing is so 
clear, when it comes to words, than those we call familiar; and clarity is some- 
thing so characteristic of the truth that it is often confused with it." Nothing more 
subtle than the suggestion: be clear so as to have at least the appearance of truth. 
Offered in this way, the advice to write simply— which usually harbors resent- 
ment — has the highest authority. J. Joubert, Oeuvres (Paris, 1883), vol. 2, p. 293 
("Du Style," no. 99). [N15a,3] 

Tf le person who could develop the Joubertian dialectic of precepts would pro- 
duce a stylisrics worth mentioning. For example, Joubert recommends the use of 
"everyday words" but warns against "colloquial language," which "expresses 
things relevant to our present customs only" ("Du Style," no. 67 < Oeuvres, vol. 2, 
p. 286>). [N16.1] 

"All heautiful expressions are susceptible of more than one meaning. When a 
beautiful expression presents a meaning more beautiful than the author's own, it 



should be adopted." J. Joubert, Oeuvres (Paris, 1883), vol. 2, p. 276 ("Du Style," 
n«. 17). [N16,2] 



With regard to political economy, Marx characterizes as "its vulgar element" 
above all "that element in it which is mere reproduction — that is, representation 
of appearance." Cited in Korsch, Karl Marx <manuscript>, vol. 2, p. 22. 51 This 
vulgar element is to be denounced in other sciences as well. [N16,3] 

Concept of nature in Marx: "If in Hegel . . . 'physical nature likewise encroaches 
on world history,' then Marx conceives nature from the beginning in social catego- 
ries. Physical nature does not enter directly into world history; rather, it enters 
indirectly, as a process of material production that goes on, from the earliest 
moment, not only between man and nature but also between man and man. Or, to 
use language that will be clear to philosophers as well: in Marx's rigorously social 
science, that pure nature presupposed by all human activity (the economic nm.tura 
naturans) is replaced everywhere by nature as material production (the economic 
natura naturatd) — that is, by a social 'matter' mediated and transformed 
through human social activity, and thus at the same time capable of further change 
and modification in the present and the future." Korsch, Karl Marx, vol. 3, p. 3. :>2 

[N16.4] 

Korsch provides the following reformulation of the Hegelian triad in Marxian 
terms: "The Hegelian 'contradiction' was replaced by the struggle of the social 
classes; the dialectical 'negation,' by the proletariat; and the dialectical 'synthe- 
sis,' by the proletarian revolution." Korsch, Karl Marx, vol. 3, p. 45. s,i [N16,5] 

Restriction of the materialist conception of history in Korsch: "As the material 
mode of production changes, so does the system of mediations existing between the 
material base and its political and juridical superstructure, with its corresponding 
social forms of consciousness. Hence, the general propositions of materialist social 
theory concerning the relations between economy and politics or economy and 
ideology, or concerning such general concepts as class and class struggle, . . . have 
a different meaning for each specific epoch and, strictly speaking, are valid, in the 
particular form Marx gave them within the present bourgeois society, only for this 
society. . . . Only for contemporary bourgeois society, where the spheres of econ- 
omy and politics are formally and entirely separated from each other, and where 
workers as citizens of the state are free and possessed of equal rights, does the 
scientific demonstration of their actual ongoing lack of freedom in the economic 
sphere have the character of a theoretical discovery." Korsch, vol. 3, pp. 21-22. 

[N16a,l] 

Korsch makes "the seemingly paradoxical observation (which is nonetheless . . . 
suited to the final and most mature form of Marxian science) that in the materialist 
social theory of Marx the ensemhle of social relations, which hourgeois sociologists 
treat as an independent domain . . . , already is investigated according to its objec- 



So tive . . . content hy the historical and social science of economics. . . . In this sense, 

Marx's materialist social science is not sociology but economics.'''' Korsch, Karl 
Marx, vol. 3, p. 103. 54 [N16a,2] 

| 

A citation from Marx on the mutahility of nature (in Korsch, Karl Marx, vol. 3, 
t« p. 9): "Even the naturally grown variations of the human species, such as differ- 

gp- ences of race, . . . can and must be abolished in the historical process." 35 

| [N16a,3] 

£k Doctrine of the superstructure, according to Korsch: "Neither 'dialectical causal- 

ly ity' in its philosophic definition, nor scientific 'causality' supplemented by 'inter- 

1 actions,' is sufficient to determine the particular kinds of connections and 

jjj relations existing hetween the economic 'base' and the juridical and political 'su- 

perstructure . . . ,' together with the 'corresponding' forms of consciousness. . . . 
8 Twentieth-century natural science has learned that the 'eausal' relations which 

H the researcher in a given field has to estahlish for that field cannot he defined in 

•B terms of a general concept or law of causality, but must he determined specifically 

for each separate field.* [*See Philipp Frank, Das Kmusalgesetz und seine Gren- 
'g, zen <The Law of Causality and Its Limits) (Vienna, 1932).] . . . The greater part of 

the results . . . obtained by Marx and Engels consist not in theoretical formula- 
tions of the new principle hut in its specific application to a series of . . . questions, 
which are either of fundamental practical importance or of an extremely suhtle 
nature theoretically. ... * [*Here, for example, belong the questions raised by 
Marx at the end of the 1857 'Introduction' <to the Grundrisse> (pp. 779ff .), and 
which concern the 'unequal development' of different spheres of social life: un- 
equal development of material production vis-a-vis artistic production (and of the 
various arts among themselves), the level of education in the United States as 
compared to that of Europe, unequal development of the relations of production 
as legal relations, and so forth.] The more precise scientific determination of the 
present contexts is still a task for thefuture . . . , a task whose center will lie, once 
again, not in theoretical formulation but in the further application and testing of 
the principles implicit in Marx's work. Nor should we adhere too strictly to the 
words of Marx, who often used his terms only figuratively — as, for instance, in 
describing the connections under consideration here as a relation between 'base' 
and 'superstructure,' as a 'correspondence,' and so on. ... In all these cases, the 
Marxian concepts (as Sorel and Lenin, among the later Marxists, understood best) 
are not intended as new dogmatic fetters, as preestablished conditions which must 
be met in some particular order by any 'materialist' investigation. They are, 
rather, a wholly undogmatic guide to research and action." Korseh, Karl Marx 
(manuscript), vol. 3 , pp. 93-96. 56 [N17] 

Materialist conception of history and materialist philosophy: "The formulas of 
materialist history that were applied by Marx and Engels . . . solely to the . . . 
investigation of bourgeois society, and transferred to other historical periods only 
with suitable elaboration, have been detached by the Marxist epigones from this 
specific application, and in general from every historical connection; and out of 



so-called historical materialism they have made a universal . . . sociological the- 
ory. From this . . . leveling ... of materialist theory of society, it was only a step to 
the idea that once again today — or especially today — it was necessary to shore up 
the historical and economic science of Marx, not only with a general social philoso- 
phy but even with a . . . universal materialist worldview embracing the totality of 
nature and society. Thus, the . . . scientific forms into which the real kernel of 
eighteenth-century philosophical materialism had evolved . . . were ultimately 
carried back to what Marx himself had once unmistakably repudiated as 'the 
philosophical phrases of the Materialists about matter.' Materialist social science 
. . . does not need . . . any such philosophic support. This most important advance 
. . . carried out by Marx was later overlooked even by . . . 'orthodox' interpreters 
of Marx. . . . They have thus reintroduced their own backward attitudes into a 
theory which Marx had consciously transformed from a philosophy into a science. 
It is the almost grotesque historical fate of the Marx-orthodoxy that, in repulsing 
the attacks of revisionists, it ultimately arrives, on all important issues, at the very 
same standpoint as that taken by its adversaries. For example, the leading repre- 
sentative of this school, . . . Plekhanov, in his eager pursuit of that 'philosophy' 
which might be the true foundation of Marxism, finally hit upon the idea of pre- 
senting Marxism as 'a form of Spinoza's philosophy freed by Feuerbach of its 
theological addendum.'" Korsch, Karl Marx (manuscript), vol. 3, pp. 29-31. 57 

[N17a] 

Korsch cites Bacon, from the Novum Orgamim: '"Recte enim Veritas temporis 
(ilia dicitur non auctoritas.' On that authority of all authorities, time, he had 
based the superiority of the new bourgeois empirical science over the dogmatic 
science of the Middle Ages." Korsch, KarlMarx (manuscript), vol. 1, p. 72. 511 

[N18.1] 

"For the positive use, Marx replaces the overweening postulate of Hegel that the 
truth must be concrete with the rational principle of specification. . . . The real 
interest lies ... in the specific traits through which each particular historical 
society is distinguished from the common features of society in general and in 
which, therefore, its development is comprised. ... In the same manner, an exact 
social science cannot form its general concepts by simply abstracting from some 
and retaining other more or less arbitrarily chosen characteristics of the given 
historical form of bourgeois society. It can secure the knowledge of the general 
contained in that particular form of society only by the minute investigation of all 
the historical conditions underlying its emergence from another state of society 
and from the actual modification of its present form under exactly established 
conditions. . . . Thus, the only genuine laws in social science are laws of develop- 
ment." Korsch, Karl Marx (manuscript), vol. 1, pp. 49-52. 5 " [N18.2] 



Hie authentic concept of universal history is a messianic concept. Universal 
history, as it is understood today, is an affair of obscurantists. [N18,3] 



The now of recognizability is the moment of awakening. (Jung would like to 
distance awakening from the dream.) [N18.4] 



In his characterization of Leopaidi, Sainte-Beuve declares himself "persuaded . . . 
that the full value and originality of literary criticism depends on its applying 
itself to subjects for which we have long possessed the background and all the 
immediate and more distant contexts." C.-A. Sainte-Beuve, Portraits contempo- 
rains, vol. 4 (Paris, 1882), p. 365. On the other hand, it must be admitted that the 
absence of certain of the conditions demanded here by Sainte-Beuve can have its 
value. A lack of feeling for the most delicate nuances of the text can itself cause 
the reader to inquire more attentively into the least of facts within the social 
relations underlying the work of art. Moreover, the insensitivity to fine shades of 
meaning can more readily procure for one (thanks to clearer apprehension of the 
contours of the work) a certain superiority to other critics, insofar as the feeling 
for nuances does not always go together with the gift for analysis. [Nl8a,l] 

Critical remarks on technical progress show up quite early. The author of the 
treatise On Art (Hippocrates?): "I believe that the inclination ... of intelligence is 
to discover any one of those things that are still unknown, if indeed it is better to 
have discovered them than not to have done so at all." Leonardo da Vmci: "How and 
why I do not write of my method of going underwater for as long as I can remain 
there without eating: if I neither publish nor divulge this information, it is be- 
cause of the wickedness of men who would avail themselves of it to commit 
murder at the bottom of the sea — by staving in ships and sinking them with their 
crews." Bacon: "In . . . lire New Atlantis, ... he entrusts to a specially chosen 
commission the responsibility for deciding which new inventions will be brought 
before the public and which kept secret." Pierre-Maxime Schuhl, Machinisme et 
philosophic (Paris, 1938), pp. 7, 35. — "The bombers remind us of what Leonardo 
da Vinci expected of man in fl ight: that he was to ascend to the skies 'in order to 
seek snow on the mountaintops and bring it back to the city to spread on the 
sweltering streets in summer" (Schuhl, Machinisme et philosophie, p. 95). 

[N18a,2] 

It may be that the continuity of tradition is mere semblance. But then precisely 
the persistence of this semblance of persistence provides it with continuity. 

[N19.1] 

Pronst, apropos of a citation (from a letter hy <Guez de> Balzac to M. deForgues) 
which he evidently borrowed from Montesquiou, to whom his comments are ad- 
dressed. (The passage may contain a nonsensical slip of the pen or a printer's 
error.) "It was fifteen days ago that I removed it [that is, the citation] from my 
proof sheets. . . . My book will no doubt he too little read for there to have been 
any risk of tarnishing your citation. Furthermore, I withdrew it less for your sake 
than for the sake of the sentence itself. In fact, I believe there exists for every 
beautiful sentence an imprescriptible right which renders it inalienable to all tak- 



ers except the one for whom it waits, according to a destination which is its des- 
tiny." Correspondance generate de Marcel Proust, vol. 1, Lettres a. Robert de 
Montesquiou, (Paris, 1930), pp. 73-74. 60 [N19.2] 

The pathological element in the notion of "culture" comes vividly to light in the 
effect produced on Raphael, the hero of lire Wild Ass's Skin, by the enormous 
stock of merchandise in the four-story antique shop into which he ventures. "To 
begin with, the stranger compared . . . three showrooms — crammed with the 
relics of civilizations and religions, deities, royalties, masterpieces of art, the prod- 
ucts of debauchery, reason and unreason — to a minor of many facets, each one 
representing a whole world. . . . The young man's senses ended by being 
numbed at the sight of so many national and individual existences, their authen- 
ticity guaranteed by the human pledges which had survived them. . . . For him 
this ocean of furnishings, inventions, fashions, works of art, and relics made up 
an endless poem. . . . He clutched at every joy, grasped at every grief, made all 
the formulas of existence his own, and . . . generously dispersed his life and 
feelings over the images of that empty, plastic nature. . . . He felt smothered 
under the debris of fifty vanished centuries, nauseated with this surfeit of human 
thought, crushed under the weight of luxury and art. . . . Alike in its caprices to 
our modern chemistry, which would reduce creation to one single gas, does not 
the soul distill fearful poisons in the rapid concentration of its pleasures ... or its 
ideas? Do not many men perish through the lightning action of some moral acid 
or other, suddenly injected into their innermost being?" Balzac, La Peau de cha- 
grin, ed. Flammaiion (Paris), pp. 19, 21-22, 24. 61 [N19,3] 

Some theses by Focillon which have appearances on their side. Of course, the 
materialist theory of art is interested in dispelling such appearance. "We have no 
right to confuse the state of the life of forms with the state of social life. The time 
that gives support to a work of art does not give definition either to its principle 
or to its specific form" (p. 93). "The combined activity of the Capetian monar- 
chy, the episcopacy, and the townspeople in the development of Gothic cathe- 
drals shows what a decisive influence may be exercised by the alliance of social 
forces. Yet no matter how powerful this activity may be, it is still by no means 
qualified to solve problems in pure statics, to combine relationships of values. 
The various masons who bonded two ribs of stone crossing at right angles 
beneath the north tower of Bayeux . . . , the creator of the choir at Saint-Denis, 
were geometers working on solids, and not historians interpreting time. [!!] The 
most attentive study of the most homogeneous milieu, of the most closely woven 
concatenation of circumstances, will not serve to give us the design of the towers 
of Laon" (p. 89). It would be necessary to follow up on these reflections in order 
to show, first, the difference between the theory of milieu and the theory of the 
forces of production, and, second, the difference between a "reconstruction" and 
a historical interpretation of works. Henri Focillon, Vie des formes (Paris, 1934). 02 

[N19a,l] 



Focillon on technique: "It has been like some observatory whence both sight and 
study might embrace within one and the same perspective the greatest possible 
number of objects and their greatest possible diversity. For technique may be 
interpreted in many various ways: as a vital force, as a theory of mechanics, or as 
a mere convenience. In my own case as a historian, I never regarded technique as 
the automatism of a 'craft,' nor as . . . the recipes of a 'cuisine'; instead I saw it as 
a whole poetry of action and ... as the means for attaining metamorphoses. It 
has always seemed to me that . . . the observation of technical phenomena not 
only guarantees a certain controllable objectivity, but affords entrance into the 
very heart of the problem, by presenting it to us in the same terms and from the same 
point of view as it is presented to the artist. " The phrase italicized by the author 
marks the basic error. Henri Focillon, Vie des formes (Paris, 1934), pp. 53-54. 03 

[Nl9a,2] 

The "activity on the part of a style in the process of self -definition ... is generally 
known as an 'evolution,' this term being here understood in its broadest and most 
general sense. Biological science checked and modulated the concept of evolution 
with painstaking care; archaeology, on the other hand, took it simply as ... a 
method of classification. I have elsewhere pointed out the dangers of 'evolution': 
its deceptive orderliness, its single-minded directness, its use, in those problematic 
cases . . . , of the expedient of 'transitions,' its inability to make room for the 
revolutionary energy of inventors." Henri Focillon, Vie des formes (Paris, 1934), 
pp. 11-12. 64 [N20] 