[Prostitution, Gambling] 



Love is a bird of passage. 

— Mouveaux tableaux de Paris, ou Observations sur les moeurs el usages des 
Parisieiu au commencement du XIX siide (Paris, 1828), vol. 1, p. 37 

... in an arcade, 

Women are as in their boudoir. 

— Brazier, Gabriel and Dumersan, Les Passages et les rues, ou La Guerre 
declaree (Paris, 1827), p. 30 



Hasn't his eternal vagabondage everywhere accustomed him to reinterpreting 
the image of the city? And doesn't he transform the arcade into a casino, into a 
gambling den, where now and again he stakes the red, blue, yellow jetons of 
feeling on women, on a face that suddenly surfaces (will it return his look?), on a 
mute mouth (will it speak?) ? What, on the baize cloth, looks out at the gambler 
from every number — luck, that is — here, from the bodies of all the women, 
winks at him as the chimera of sexuality: as his type. This is nothing other than 
the number, the cipher, in which just at that moment luck will be called by name, 
in order to jump immediately to another number. His type — that's the number 
that pays off thirty- six-fold, the one on which, without even trying, the eye of the 
voluptuary falls, as the ivory ball falls into the red or black compartment. He 
leaves the Palais-Royal with bulging pockets, calls to a whore, and once more 
celebrates in her arms the communion with number, in which money and riches, 
absolved from every earthen weight, have come to him from the fates like a 
joyous embrace returned to the full. For in gambling hall and bordello, it is the 
same supremely sinful delight: to chaJlenge fate in pleasure. Let unsuspecting 
idealists imagine that sensual pleasure, of whatever stripe, could ever determine 
the theological concept of sin. The origin of true lechery is nothing else but this 
stealing of pleasure from out of the course of life with God, whose covenant with 
such life resides in the name. The name itself is the cry of naked lust. This sober 
thing, fateless in itself — the name — knows no other adversary than the fate that 
takes its place in whoring and that forges its arsenal in superstition. Thus in 
gambler and prostitute that superstition which arranges the figures of fate and 



fills all wanton behavior with fateful forwardness, fateful concupiscence, bringing 
even pleasure to kneel before its throne. [0 1 , 1 ] 



"When I turn back in thought to the Salon des Etrangers, as it was in the second 
decade of our century, I see before me the finely etched features and gallant figure 
of the Hungarian Count Hunyady, t he greatest gambler of his day, who hack then 
took all society's breath away. . . . Hunyady's luck for a long time was extraordi- 
nary; no hank could withstand his assault, and his winnings must have amounted 
to nearly two million francs. His manner was surprisingly calm and extremely 
distinguished; he sat there, as it appeared, in complete equanimity, his right hand 
in thehreast of his jacket, while thousands of francs hung upon the fall of a card or 
a roll of the dice. His valet, however, confided to an indiscreet friend that Mon- 
sieur's nerves were not so steely as he wanted people to helieve, and that of a 
morning the count more often than not would hear the bloody traces of his nails, 
which in his excitement he had dug into the fl esh of his chest as the game was tak- 
ing a dangerous turn." Captain Gronow, Aits der grossen Welt iPariser und Lon- 
doner Sittenbilder, 1810-1860, ed. Heinrich Conrad> (Stuttgart, 1908), p. 59.' 

[Ol,2] 

On the way Blucher gambled in Paris, see Gronow's hook, Aits der grossen Welt 
<pp. 54— 56> . When he had lost, he forced the Bank of France to advance him 
100,000 francs so he could continue playing; after this scandal broke, he had to 
leave Paris. "Blucher never quit Salon 113 at the Palais-Royal, and spent six 
million during his stay; all his lands were in pledge at the time of his departure 
from Paris." Paris took in more during theoccupation <of 1814> than it paid out 
in war reparations. [Ol,3] 

It is only by comparison with the ancien regime that one can say that in the 
nineteenth century the bourgeois takes to gambling. [Ol,4] 

The following account shows very conclusively how public immorality (in con- 
trast to private) carries in itself, in its liberating cynicism, its own corrective. It is 
reported by Carl Benedict Hase, who was in France as an indigent tutor and who 
sent letters home from Paris and other stations of his wandering. "As I was 
walking in the vicinity of the Pont Neuf, a heavily made-up prostitute accosted 
me. She had on a light muslin dress that was tucked up to the knee and that 
clearly displayed the red silk drawers covering thigh and belly. l Tiens, tieru, mon 
ami? she said, 'you are young, you're a foreigner, you will have need of it." She 
then seized my hand, slipped a piece of paper into it, and disappeared in the 
crowd. Thinking I had been given an address, I looked at the missive; and what 
did I read? — An advertisement for a doctor who was claiming to cure all imagin- 
able aihnents in the shortest possible time. It is strange that the girls who are 
responsible for the malady should here put in hand the means to recover from 
it." Carl Benedict Hase, Briefe von der Wanderung und aus Paris (Leipzig, 1894), 
pp. 48-49. [Ol,5] 




A gallery of the Palais-Royal. From a watercolor entitled La Sortie du numero 113, artist un- 
known, 1815. See 01,3. 



"As for the virtue of women, I have hut one response to make to those who would 
ask me about this: it strongly resemhles the curtains in theaters, for their petti- 
coats rise each evening three times rather than once." Comte Horace de Viel- 
Castel, Memoires sur le regne de Napoleon III (Paris, 1883), vol. 2, p. 188. 



"Hirondelles — women who work the window." Levic-Torca, Paris-Noceur (Paris, 
1910), p. 142. The windows in the upper story of the arcades are choir lofts in 
which the angels that men call "swallows" are nesting. [Ola.2] 

On what is "close" (Veuillot: "Paris is musty and close") in fashion: the "glaucous 
gleam" under the petticoats, of which Aragon speaks. 2 The corset as the torso's 
arcade. The absolute antithesis to this open-air world of today. What today is de 
rigueur among the lowest class of prostitutes — not to undress — may once have 
been the height of refinement. One liked the woman retrousse e, tucked up. Hessel 
thinks he has found here the origin of Wedekind's erotics; in his view, 
Wedekind's fresh-air pathos was only a bluff. And in other respects? D Fashion D 

[Ola.3] 

On the dialectical function of money in prostitution. It buys pleasure and, at the 
same time, becomes the expression of shame. "I knew," says Casanova of a 
procuress, "that I would not have the strength to go without giving her some- 
thing." This striking admission reveals his knowledge of the most secret mecha- 
nism of prostitution. No girl would choose to become a prostitute if she counted 
solely on the stipulated payoff from her partner. Even his gratitude, which per- 
haps results in a small percentage more, would hardly seem to her a sufficient 
basis. How then, in her unconscious understanding of men, does she calculate? 
This we cannot comprehend, so long as money is thought of here as only a 
means of payment or a gift. Certainly the whore's love is for sale. But not her 
client's shame. The latter seeks some hiding place during this quarter-hour, and 
finds the most genial: in money. There are as many nuances of payment as there 
are nuances of lovemaking — lazy and swift, furtive or brutal. What does this 
signify? The shame-reddened wound on the body of society secretes money and 
closes up. It forms a metallic scab. We leave to the roue the cheap pleasure of 
believing himself devoid of shame. Casanova knew better: impudence throws 
the first coin onto the table, and shame pays out a hundred more to cover it. 

[Ola.4] 

"The dance in which . . . vulgarity makes its appearance with unexampled impu- 
dence is the traditional French quadrille. When the dancers manage to offend 
against every tender feeling by their pantomime — without, however, going so far 
as to have to fear heing ejected from the room by the on-duty police agents — then 
this type of dance is called quincan. But when all moral sentiment is trampled on 
by the manner of the dancing, when at last, after lengthy hesitation, the sergeants 
de villefeel compelled to recall the dancers to a sense of decorum with the custom- 
ary words, "Dance more decently or you will he shown the door!" — then this 
intensification or, better, 'this degradation' is known as chahue. I . . . The bestial 
grossness . . . has led to the creation of a police ordinance. . . . Men, accordingly, 
are not allowed to appear at these halls either masked or in costume. This is in part 
to prevent their being tempted by their disguise to behave still more vilely hut also, 
and chielly, in the event a dancer should reach the Parisian ne plus ultra of de- 
pravity in dancing and subsequently he shown to the door by the sergeants de 



ville, to make sure he will be recognized thereafter and kept from reentering the 
room. . . . Women, on the other hand, are not allowed to appear unless they are 
masked." Ferdinand von Gall, Paris unci seine Salons (Oldenburg, 1844), vol. 1, 
pp. 209,213-214. [Ola,5] 

Comparison of today's erotic fields of action with those of the middle of the 
previous century. The social play of eroticism turns today on the question: How 
far can a respectable woman go without losing herself? To represent the joys of 
adultery without its actual circumstances is a favorite device of dramatists. The 
terrain on which love's duel with society unfolds is thus, in a very broad sense, 
the realm of "free" love. For the Forties, Fifties, and Sixties of the previous 
century, however, things were entirely different. Nothing illustrates this more 
clearly than the account of the "pensions" which Ferdinand von Gall provides in 
his book Paris und seine Salons (Oldenburg, 1844-1845) <vol. 1, pp. 225-231>. 
There we learn that in many of these boardinghouses at the evening meal — 
which, with prior notification, strangers too could attend — it was the rule to 
bring in cocottes, whose job it was to play the part of girls from good families. In 
fact, they were not disposed to let down their masks too quickly, preferring 
instead to wrap themselves in endless layers of respectability and family connec- 
tion; to strip these away entailed an elaborate game of intrigues that ultimately 
served to raise the women's price. What is expressed in these relations, it goes 
without saying, is less the period's pruderie than its fanatical love of masquerade. 

[02,1] 



More on the mania for masks: "We know from the statistics on prostitution that 
the fallen woman takes a certain pride in being deemed by nature still worthy of 
motherhood — a feeling that in no way excludes her aversion to the hardship and 
disfigurement that goes along with this honor. She thus willingly chooses a middle 
way to exhibit her condition: she keeps it 'for two months, for three months,' 
naturally not longer." F. Th. Vischer, Mode und Cynismus (Stuttgart, 1879), p. 7. 
D Fashion □ [02,2] 

In prostitution, one finds expressed the revolutionary side of technology (the 
symbolic side, which creates no less than discovers). "As if the laws of nature to 
which love submits were not more tyrannical and more odious than the laws of 
society! The metaphysical meaning of sadism is the hope that the revolt of man 
will take on such intensity as to summon nature to change its laws. For, with 
women no longer wanting to endure the ordeal of pregnancy, the risks and the 
sufferings of delivery and of miscarriage, nature will be constrained to invent 
some other means for perpetuating humanity on this earth." Emmanuel Berl, 
"Premier Pamphlet," Europe, 75 <1929>, pp. 405-406. And in fact: the sexual 
revolt against l»ve not only springs from the fanatical, obsessional will to pleas- 
ure; it also aims to make nature adaptable and obedient to this will. The traits in 
question here appear more clearly still when prostitution (especially in the cynical 
form it took toward the end of the century, in the Paris arcades) is regarded less 
as the opposite than as the decline of love. It is then that the revolutionary aspect 



of this decline fuses, as though of its own accord, with the very same aspect in the 
decline of the arcades. [02,3] 



Feminine fauna of the arcades: prostitutes, grisettes, old-hag shopkeepers, female 
street vendors, glovers, demoiselles. — This last was the name, around 1830, for 
incendiaries disguised as women. [02,4] 

Around 1830: "The Palais-Royal is still enough in fashion that the renting of 
chairs brings in some 32,000 francs to Louis Philippe, and the tax on gaming some 
five and a half million to the treasury. . . . The gambling houses of the Palais-Royal 
rival those of the Cercle des Etrangers on the Rue Grange-Bateliere and of Fras- 
cati on the Rue de Richelieu." <Lucien> Dubech and < Pierre) d'Espezel, Histoire 
de Paris (Paris, 1926), p. 365. [02,5] 

Rites de passage — this is the designation in folklore for the ceremonies that attach 
to death and hirth, to marriage, puberty, and so forth. In modern life, these 
transitions are becoming ever more unrecognizable and impossible to experience. 
We have grown very poor in threshold experiences. Falling asleep is perhaps the 
only such experience that remains to us. (But together with this, there is also 
waking up.) And, finally, there is the ebb and flow of conversation and the sexual 
permutations of love — experience that surges over thresholds like the changing 
figures of the dream. "How mankind loves to remain transfixed," says Aragon, 
"at the very doors of the imagination!" Paysan <de Paris (Paris, 1926)>, p. 74. 3 It is 
not only from the thresholds of these gates of imagination that lovers and friends 
like to draw their energies; it is from thresholds in general. Prostitutes, however, 
love the thresholds of these gates of dream. — The threshold must be carefully 
distinguished from the boundary. A Schwelle <threshold> is a zone. Transforma- 
tion, passage, wave action are in the word schwellen, swell, and etymology ought 
not to overlook these senses: 1 On the other hand, it is necessary to keep in mind 
the immediate tectonic and ceremonial context which has brought the word to its 
current meaning. D Dream House D [02a,l] 

Under the northeast peristyle of the Palais-Royal lay the Cafe des Aveugles. 
"There, a half-dozen hlindmen from the Quinze-Vlngts Hospital unceasingly per- 
formed more or less deafening music from six o'clock in the evening to one o'clock 
in the morning; for the underground establishments were open to the public only 
from dusk to dawn. They were the preferred rendezvous of those licensed Dryads 
and Nysiads, those impure Sirens who at least had the merit of conferring move- 
ment and life on this immense bazaar of pleasures — sad, somber and mute today 
as the brothels of Herculaneum." Histoire des cafes de Paris extraite des 
mhnoires d'un viveur (Paris, 1857), p. 7. [02a,2] 

"On December 31, 1836, all the gambling houses were closed by authority of the 
police. At Frascati, there was a small riot. This was the mortal blow to the Palais- 
Royal, already dethroned since 1830 by the boulevard." Dubech and d'Espezel, 
Histoire de Paris (Paris, 1926), p. 389. [02a,3] 



"Talma, Talleyrand, Rossini, Balzac" — named as gamblers in Edouard Gourdon, 
Les Faucheurs de nuit (Paris, 1860), p. 14. [02a,4J 



"I submit that the passion for gambling is the noblest of all passions, because it 
comprehends all others. A series of lucky rolls gives me more pleasure than a man 
who does not gamble can have over a period of several years. I play by intuition, 
par Vesprit — that is to say, in the most keenly felt and delicate manner. Do you 
think I recognize gain only in terms of the gold that comes my way? You are 
mistaken. I see it in terms of the joys which gold procures, and I savor them to the 
full. These joys, vivid and scorching as lightning, are too rapid-fire to hecome 
distasteful, and too diverse to become boring. I live a hundred lives in one. If it is 
a voyage, it is like that of an electric spark. ... If I keep my fist shut tight, and if I 
hold onto my banknotes, it is because I know the value of time too well to spend it 
like other men. To give myself to one pleasure alone would cause me to lose a 
thousand others. ... I have spiritual pleasures, and I want no others." Edouard 
Gourdon, Les Faucheurs de nuit (Paris, 1860), pp. 14-15. The passage cited from 
La Bruyere! — Compare: " What? I no longer act as I might choose?" Wallenstein:' 

[02a,5] 

"The gamhling concessions included the Maison du Cercle des Etrangers, at 6 Rue 
Grange-Bateliere; the Maison de Livry, known as Frascati, at 103 Rue Richelieu; 
the Maison Dunans, 40 Rue du Mont-Blanc; the Maison Marivaux, 13 Rue Mari- 
vaux; the Maison Paphos, 110 Rue dn Temple; the Maison Dauphine, 36 Rue 
Dauphine; and at the Palais-Royal, no. 9 (through no. 24), no. 129 (through no. 
137), no. 119 (extending from no. 102), no. 154 (extending from no. 145). These 
businesses, despite their great number, were not enough for the gamblers. Specu- 
lation brought about the opening of others which the police were not always able to 
monitor effectively. The patrons played ecarte, bouillotte, and baccarat. The es- 
tablishments were managed by . . . hideous-looking old women, disgraceful rem- 
nants of every vice. They gave themselves out to he widows of generals; they were 
protected by self-styled colonels, who received a share of the take. This state of 
things continued until 1837, when the gamhling establishments were shut down." 
Edouard Gourdon, Les F aucheurs de nuit (Paris 1860), p. 34. [03,1] 

Gourdon notes that, in certain circles, the gamblers were almost exclusively 
women (Les Faucheurs de nuit, pp. 55ff.). [03,2] 

"The adventure of the municipal guardsman on horsehack, placed like a fetish at 
the door of a gambler down on his luck, has remained in the annals of our circle. 
The worthy trooper, helieving himself stationed there to pay honor to the guests at 
some reception, was greatly amazed at the silence of the street and the house, when 
suddenly, at around one o'clock in the morning, the sad victim of the green tahles 
returned. As on other evenings, and despite the influence of the fetish, the gambler 
had lost heavily. He rings the bell; no one comes. He rings again; nothing stirs in 
the lodge of the sleeping Cerherus, and the door is unrelenting. Impatient, irri- 



tatecl, provoked above all by the losses he has just sustained, the tenant smashes a 
pane of glass with his walking-stick to rouse the porter. Here the municipal guards- 
man, until then a mere spectator of this nocturnal scene, believes it is his duty to 
intervene. He stoops down, seizes the troublemaker by the collar, hoists him onto 
his horse, and trots smartly off to his barracks, delighted to have a decent pretext 
for punishing a faction he dislikes. . . . Explanations notwithstanding, the gambler 
spent the night on a camp cot." Edouard Gourdon, Les Faucheurs de nuit (Paris, 
1860), pp. 181-182. [03,3] 

On the Palais-Royal: "The former minister of police, Merlin, proposed turning 
this palace of luxury and intemperate pleasure into barracks, and so to shut out 
that vile breed of humanity from their habitual gathering place." F. J. L. Meyer, 
Fragmente aus Paris ini IV Jahr der franzdsischen Republik (Hamburg, 1797), 
vol. 1, p. 24. [03,4] 

Delvau on the lorettes of Montmartre: "They are not women — they are nights." 
Alfred Delvau, Les Dessous de Park (Paris 1860), p. 142. [03,5] 

Isn't there a certain structure of money that can be recognized only in fate, and a 
certain structure of fate that can be recognized only in money? [03,6] 

Professors of argot: 6 "Possessed of nothing more than a perfect knowledge of 
martingales, series, and intermittences, they sat in the gambling dens from open- 
ing to closing time and ended their evening in those grottoes of bouillotte nick- 
named Baural houses. Always on the lookout for novices and beginners . . . , 
these bizarre professors dispensed advice, talked over past throws of the dice, 
predicted the throws to come, and played for others. In the event of losses, they 
had only to curse the toss or put the blame on a drawn game, on chance, on the 
date of the month if it was the thirteenth, on the day of the week if it was Friday. 
In the event of a win, they would draw their dividend, over and above what they 
skimmed during their management of funds — a transaction which was known as 
'feeding the magpie.' These operators divided into different classes: the aristo- 
crats (all colonels or marquis of the ancien regime), the plebeians bom of the 
Revolution, and finally those who offered their services for fifty centimes." Alfred 
Marquiset, Jeux et joueurs d'autrefois, 1789-1837 (Paris, 1917), p. 209. The book 
contains valuable information on the role of the aristocracy and the military in 
the cultivation of gambling. [03a,l] 

Palais-Royal. "The second story is inhabited largely by the high-class femmes 
perdues. . . . On the third floor and ait paradis, in the mansards, reside those of a 
lower grade. Their livelihood compels them to live in the center of the city, in the 
Palais-Royal, in the Rue Traversiere, and surrounding areas. . . . Perhaps 600- 
800 live in the Palais-Royal, but a far greater number go walking there in the 
evenings, for that is where most of the idlers are to he found. On the Rue Saint- 
Honore and some adjacent streets, at evening, they stand in a row just like the 



cabriolets for rent in the Palais during the clay. But their numbers diminish as one 
moves further away, in the city, from the Palais-Royal." J. F. Benzenherg, Briefe 
geschrieben auf einer Reise nach Paris (Dortmund, 1805), vol. 1, pp. 261, 263. 
The author estimates the number of femmes perdues at "around 10,000"; "before 
the Revolution, according to a police report, they numhered 28,000'' (p. 261). 



"Vice had accomplished its customary task, for her as for the others. It had refined 
and rendered desirable the brazen ugliness of her face. Although the girl had lost 
none of the suburban quaintness of her origins, she had become — with her showy 
jewelry and her physical attractions ostentatiously worked up through creams — 
capahle of stimulating and tempting the bored appetites and dulled sensibilities 
that are enlivened only hy the provocations of makeup and the swirl of lavish 
gowns." J.-K. Huysmans, Croquis parisiens (Paris, 1886). p. 57 ("L'Amhu- 



"It is useless to expect that a bourgeois could ever succeed in comprehending the 
phenomena of the distribution of wealth. For, with the development of mechanical 
production, property is depersonalized and arrayed in the impersonal collective 
form of the joint stock company, whose shares are finally caught up in the whirl- 
pool of the Stock Exchange. . . . They are . . . lost hy one, won by another — in- 
deed, in a manner so reminiscent of gamhling that the huying and selling of stocks 
is actually known as 'playing' the market. Modern economic development as a 
whole tends more and more to transform capitalist society into a giant interna- 
tional gambling house, where the hourgeois wins and loses capital in consequence 
of events which remain unknown to him. . . . The 'inexplicable' is enthroned in 
bourgeois society as in a gambling hall. . . . Successes and failures, thus arising 
from causes that are unanticipated, generally unintelligible, and seemingly de- 
pendent on chance, predispose the hourgeois to the gambler's frame of mind. . . . 
The capitalist whose fortune is tied up in stocks and bonds, which are suhject to 
variations in market value and yield for which he does not understand the causes, 
is a professional gamhler. The gamhler, however, ... is a snpremely superstitious 
being. The hahitues of gamhling casinos always possess magic formulas to conjure 
the Fates. One will mutter a prayer to Saint Anthony of Padua or some other spiri t 
of the heavens; another will place his bet only if a certain color has won; while a 
third holds a rahhit's foot in his left hand; and so on. The inexplicable in society 
envelops the hourgeois, as the inexplicahle in nature the savage." Paul Laf argue, 
"Die Ursachen des Gottesglauhens," Die nene Zeit, 24., no. 1 (Stuttgart, 1906), 



Adolph Stahr mentions a certain Chicard as premier cancan dancer at the Bal 
Mahille, and maintains that he dances under the surveillance of two police ser- 
geants whose sole responsibility is to keep an eye on the dancing of this one man. In 
comiection with this: the statement — cited, without specific references, in Wolde- 
mar Seyffarth, Wahrnehmungen in Paris, 1853 und 1854* (Gotha, 1855), p. 136 — 



[03a,2] 



lame"). 



[03a,3] 



p. 512. 



[04,1] 



"that only the superior strength of the police force ean keep within certain harely 
adequate hounds the hestiality of the Paris crowds." [04,2] 



The "Original" — a sort of primitive man with enormous heard who can he seen in 
the Palais-Royal — is called Chodruc Duclos. [04,3] 

"Is it an insignifieant delight to tempt fortune? Is it a pleasure devoid of intoxica- 
tion to taste in one second months, years, a whole lifetime of fears and hopes? I was 
not ten years old when M. Grepinet, my master in the junior class, read us the 
fable L' Homme et le genie <The Man and the Genie>. Yet I rememher the talc 
hetter than if I had read it yesterday. A genie gives a boy a ball of thread, and tells 
him: 'This is the thread of your life. Take it. When you find time heavy on your 
hands, pull it out; your days will pass quick or slow, according as you unwind the 
ball rapidly or little by little. So long as you leave the thread alone, you will remain 
stationary at the same hour of your existence.' The hoy took the thread; first he 
pulled at it to become a man, then to marry the girl he loved, then to see his 
children grow up, to win offices and profit and honor, to abridge anxieties, to 
escape griefs and the infirmities that come with the years, and finally, alas! to cut 
short a peevish old age. He had lived just four months and six days since the date 
of the genie's visit. Well, what is gambling, I should like to know, hut the art of 
producing in a second the changes that Destiny ordinarily effects only in the 
course of many hours or even many years, the art of collecting into a single instant 
the emotions dispersed throughout the slow-moving existence of ordinary men, the 
secret of living a whole lifetime in a few minutes — in a word, the genie's ball of 
thread? Gambling is a hand-to-hand encounter with Fate. . . . The stake is 
money — in other words, immediate, infinite possibilities. . . . Perhaps the next 
card turned, the hall now rolling, will give the player parks and gardens, fields and 
forests, castles and manors lifting heavenward their pointed turrets and fretted 
roofs. Yes, that little bouncing ball holds within it acres of good land and roofs of 
slate with sculpted chimneys reflected in the hroad bosom of the Loire; it contains 
treasures of art, marvels of taste, jewels of price, the most exquisite bodies in all 
the world, nay! even souls — souls no one ever dreamed were venal, all the decora- 
tions, all the distinctions, all the elegance, and all the puissance of the world. . . . 
And you would have me give up gamhling? Nay; if gamhling only availed to give 
endless hopes, if our only vision of it were the smile of its green eyes, it would he 
loved less fanatically. But it has nails of adamant; it is cruel and terrible. At its 
caprice it gives poverty and wretchedness and shame — that is why its votaries 
adore it. The fascination of danger is at the bottom of all great passions. There is 
no fullness of pleasure unless the precipice is near. It is the mingling of terror with 
delight that intoxicates. And what more terrifying than gamhling? It gives and 
takes away; its logic is not our logic. It is dumb and hlind and deaf. It is almighty. 
It is a God. ... It has its votaries and its saints, who love it for itself, not for what 
it promises, and who fall down in adoration when its hlow strikes them. It strips 
them ruthlessly, and they lay the hlame on themselves, not on their duty. T played 



a bad game,' they say. They find fault with themselves; they do not blaspheme 
their God." Anatole France, Le Jardin d? Epicure (Paris), pp. 15-18. ' [04a] 



Beraud seeks to advocate, through extensive argumentation, the benefits of ad- 
ministrative — as opposed to judicial — proceedings against prostitutes: "Thus, the 
sanctuary of justice will not have been publicly sullied hy an unclean affair, and 
the crime is punished, but in a discretionary manner, hy virtue of a particular 
ordinance of the Prefect of PoUce." F. F. A. Beraud, Les Filles publiques de Paris 
et la police qui les regit (Paris and Leipzig, 1839), vol. 2, p. 50. [05,1] 

"A marlou <tomcat> ... is a handsome young man, strong and well built, who 
knows how to defend himself, to dress well, to dance the chahue and the cancan 
with elegance, to he ohliging toward girls devoted to the cult of Venus, and to 
provide for them in times of conspicuous danger; who knows also how to get them 
respect and to force them to conduct themselves decently. . . . Here, then, we have 
a class of individuals who, f rom time immemorial, have distinguished themselves 
hy their attractive appearance, by their exemplary conduct, and by the services 
they have rendered society, and who now are reduced to dire circumstances." 
50,000 Voleurs de plus a Paris, ou Reclamation des anciens marlous de la capi- 
tale, contre I'ordonnance de M. le Prefet de police, concernant les filles publiques; 
Par le beau Theodore Cancan, cited in F. F. A. Beraud, Les Filles publiques de 
Paris et la police qui les regit (Paris and Leipzig, 1839), vol. 2, p. 109-110, 113- 
114. [The pamphlet slightly antedates the work that cites it.] [05,2] 

From the police edict of April 14., 1830, regulating prostitution: "Art. (1) . . . They 
are forbidden to appeal - at any time, or on any pretext, in the arcades, in the 
public gardens, or on the boulevards. Art. (2) Filles publiques are not permitted to 
engage in prostitution except in licensed brothels (maisons de tolerance). Art. (3) 
Filles isolees — that is to say, those who do not reside in licensed brothels — may not 
enter these houses until after the lighting of the street lamps; they must proceed 
directly there and be dressed simply and decently. . . . Art. (4) They may not, in a 
single evening, leave one licensed brothel to go to another. Art. (5) Unattached 
girls must leave the licensed hrothels and return home hy eleven o'clock in the 
evening. . . . Art. (7) Licensed brothels shall he indicated by an entry light and, in 
the early hours, by an older woman tending the door. . . . Signed: Mangin." 
F. F. A. Beraud, Les Filles publiques de Paris et la police qui les regit (Paris and 



Bonuses earmarked for the brigade d'ordre: three francs for identification of a 
prostitute under the age of twenty-one; fifteen franes for identification of an illicit 
brothel; twenty-five francs for identification of a brothel of minors. Beraud, Les 



Leipzig, 1839), vol. 2, p. 133-135. 



[05,3] 



Filles publiques, <vol. 2,> pp. 138-139. 



[05,4] 



Explanations offered hy Beraud concerning his proposals for new regulations. (1) 
With respect to the old woman at the threshold: "The second paragraph prohihits 



this woman from passing beyond the doorstep, because it often happens that she 
has the audacity to step out and intercept passersby. With my own eyes I have seen 
these panders take men by the arm or by the coat and, so to speak, force them to 
enter their houses." (2) With respect to the interdiction on commerce for prosti- 
tutes: "I would also forbid the opening of stores or shops in which filles publiques 
are installed as milliners, seamstresses, sellers of perfume, and the like. Women 
who work in these stores and shops will station themselves at open doors or win- 
dows in order to send signals to passersby. . . . There are others more ingenious 
who close their doors and windows hut send signals through glass panes unpro- 
vided with curtains; or the curtains are left open just enough to permit easy com- 
munication between outside and interior. Some of these women rap against the 
front of the shop each time a man passes by, so that he returns to the spot where 
the noise was heard; and then such scandalous signs and beckonings ensue as 
could escape the attention of no one. All these shops are found in the arcades." 
F. F. A. Beraud, Les Filles publiques de Paris et la police qui les regit (Paris and 



Beraud declares liimself in favor of an unlimited number of brothels. "Art. (13) 
Every woman or girl of legal age who has suitable space in her living quarters (at 
least two rooms), and who is authorized by her husband if she is married, . . . will 
be able, as the proprietor or principal tenant of the house she inhabits, to become 
mistress of the house and to obtain a license for operating a brothel." Beraud, Les 
Filles publiques de Paris, vol. 2, p. 156. [OSa,2] 

Beraud's proposal is that every girl, even a minor, should, if she so desires, be 
registered as a prostitute. From his argument: "Your feeling of duty demands a 
continual surveillance to protect these children. ... To spurn them is to take on 
one's head all the consequences of cruel abandonment. . . . They must be regis- 
tered, then, and surrounded with all the vigilance of authority. Instead of return- 
ing them to an atmosphere of corruption, let us suhmit these hardly nubile girls to 
a regular life in a house specially designed to receive them. . . . Notify their par- 
ents. As soon as they understand that the dissolute life of their daughters will 
remain undisclosed, that it is a secret religiously guarded by the administration, 
they will consent once again to acknowledge them." Beraud, Les Filles publiques, 



"Why don't . . . the police allow . , . some of the mistresses of the better-known 
houses of prostitution to give . . . evening parties, balls, and concerts, with the 
addition of tables for ecarte? Then, at least, the sharpers could be carefully 
watched, whereas in other circles [gambling houses are meant] this is impossible, 
seeing that police action . . . there is . . . virtually nil." F. F. A. Beraud, Les Filles 
publiques de Paris et la police qui les regit (Paris and Leipzig, 1839), vol. 2, p. 202. 



Leipzig, 1839), vol. 2, pp. 149-150, 152-153. 



[05a,l] 



<vol. 2,> pp. 170-171. 



[05a,3] 



[06,1] 



"There are . . . epochs, seasons of the year even, which are fatal to the virtue of a 
great many young Parisiennes. During these periods, in the licensed brothels and 



elsewhere, the investigations of the police turn up many more girls engaged in illicit 
prostitution than during all the rest of the year. I have often inquired into the 
causes of these periodic surges of dehauchery, hut there isn't anyone — even in the 
administration — who can answer this question. I have to rely on my own ohserva- 
tions here, and, after much perseverance, I have finally succeeded in discovering 
the true principle of this increase in prostitution . . . at . . . certain times of the 
year. . . . With the approach of New Year's Day, of the Feast of Kings, and the 
festivals of the Virgin, . . . girls like to give and receive presents or to offer beauti- 
ful bouquets; they also want a new dress for themselves, or a hat in the newest 
fashion, and, lacking the necessary pecuniary means, . . . they turn for some days 
to prostitution to acquire such means. . . . Here, then, are the motives for the 
recrudescence in acts of debauchery at certain intervals and during certain holi- 
days." F. F. A. Beraud, Les Filles publiques de Paris et la police qui les regit (Paris 
and Leipzig, 1839), vol. 1, pp. 252-254. [06,2] 

Against the medical examination at police headquarters: "Every woman seen 
walking along the Rue de Jerusalem, either to or from the police station there, is 
immediately stigmatized with the name fille publique. ... It is a regular scandal. 
On the days set aside for visits, one always finds the approaches to the station 
overrun by a large number of men awaiting the appearance of these unhappy 
creatures, knowing, as they do, that those who leave by the dispensary have been 
deemed healthy." F. F. A. Beraud, Les Filles publiques de Paris, vol. 1, pp. 189- 
190. [06,3] 

The lorettes preferred the neighborhood around Notre Dame de Lorette because it 
was new, and because, as the first occupants of the recently constructed buildings, 
they paid lower rents. [06,4] 

"If it is a different sort of allure that you seek, go to the Tuileries, to the Palais- 
Royal, or to the Boulevard des Italiens. There you will see more than one urban 
siren seated on a chair, her feet resting on another chair, while beside her a third 
chair lies vacant. It is a magnet for the ladies' man. . . . The milliners' shops . . . 
likewise offer a multitude of resources for enthusiasts. There you dicker over 
hats — pink, green, yellow, lilac, or plaid. You agree on a price; you give your 
address; and next day, at the appointed hour, you see arrive at your place not only 
the hat but the girl who was positioned behind it, and who was crimping, with 
delicate fingers, the gauze, the ribbon, or some other frill so pleasing to the la- 
dies." F. F. A. Beraud, Les Filles publiques de Paris; Precedees dhuie notice histo- 
rique sur la prostitution chez les divers peuples de la terre, by M.A.M., vol. 1, 
pp. cii-civ (Preface). [06a,l] 

"That the numher of filles publiques at first seems very great is •wing to a sort of 
phantasmagoria produced by the comings and goings of these women along a rou- 
tine circuit, which has the effect of multiplying them to infinity. . . . Adding to this 
illusion is the fact that, on a single evening, the fille publique very often sports 
multiple disguises. With an eye just the least hit practiced, it is easy to convince 



oneself that the woman who at eight o'clock is dressed in a rich and elegant outfit is 
the same who appears as a cheap grisette at nine, and who will show herself at ten 
in a peasant dress. It is this way at all points in the capital to which prostitutes are 
habitually drawn. For example: follow one of these girls down the boulevard, 
between the Porte Saint-Martin and the Porte Saint-Denis. She is attired for the 
nonce in a hat with feathers and a silk gown covered by a shawl. She turns into the 
Rue Saint-Martin, keeping always to the right-hand side, comes to the narrow 
streets that border the Rue Saint-Denis, and enters one of the numerous houses of 
debauchery located there. A short time later, she comes out wearing her gray gown 
or rustic weeds." F. F. A. Beraud, Les Filles publiques de Paris (Paris and Leipzig, 
1839), vol. 1, pp. 51-52. D Fashion D [06a,2] 

Les Filles de marbre <The Marble Maidens), a play in five acts, with songs, by 
MM. Theodore Barriere and Lambert Thiboust; performed for the first time, in 
Paris, at the Theatre du Vaudeville, May 17, 1853. The first act has the main 
characters appearing as ancient Greeks; the hero, Raphael, who later dies for love 
of the marble maiden, Marco, is here the sculptor Phidias, who creates the figures 
of marble. The act closes with a smile from the statues: they remained motionless 
when Phidias promised them fame, but turn smiling to Gorgias, who promises 
them money. [07,1] 

"You see, ... in Paris there are two kinds of women, just as there are two kinds of 
houses . . . : the bourgeois house, where one lives only after signing a lease, and the 
rooming house, where one lives by the month. . . . How are they to be distin- 
guished? . . . By the sign. . . . Now, the outfit is the sign of the female . . . , and 
there are outfits of such eloquence that it is ahsolutely as if you could read on the 
second floor the advertisement, 'Furnished Apartment to Let'!" Dumanoir and 
Th. Barriere, Les Toilettes tapageuses: Comedie en un acte (Paris, 1856), p. 28. 

[07,2] 

Nicknames of the drum corps at the Ecole Polytechnique around 1830: Gavotte, 
Vaudeville, Melodrame, Zephir. Around 1860: Brin d'Amour < Blade of Love), 
Cuisse de Nymphe <Nymph's Thigh >. <G.> Pinet, <Histoire de V Ecole polytech- 
nique (Paris, 1887),> p. 212. [07,3] 

Bourlier proposes that the gambling houses reopen concessions and that the re- 
ceipts be used to build an opera house — "one as magnificent as the Stock Ex- 
change" — and a hospital. Louis Bourlier, Epitre aux detracteurs du jeu (Paris, 
1831), p. vii. [07,4] 

Against the gambling firm of Benazet — which, among other things, engaged in 
illegal business practices by using, in its gambling houses, a higher exchange-rate 
on gold for its own transactions — the following tract appeared: Louis Bonrlier, 
Petition a MM. les deputes (Paris [Galeries d'Orleans], June 30, 1839). Bourlier 
was a former employee of the firm. [07,5] 



•n the floor of the Stock Exchange, as on our parquet, 

You come take your chances, wager what yon may: 

Keel and black at trente et quurunte, rise and fall at the Bourse, 

•f every loss and every gain are equally the source, 



For if playing the market is just like our roulette, 
Why proscribe the latter and the former abet? 

Louis Bourlier, Stances d V occasion de la loi qui sup prime la ferme des jeux; 
Addressees a la Chambre (Paris, 1837), <p. 5>. [07,6] 

A great print (lithograph) from 1852, Maison de jeu < Gambling House>, shows at 
center the emblematic figure of a panther or tiger, on whose coat, as though on a 
rug, the better half of a roulette table is set. Cabinet des Estampes. [07a,l] 

"Lorettes were variously priced, according to the districts in which they lived." 
Going from the cheaper to the more expensive: Rue de Grammont, Ruedu Helder, 
Rues Saint-Lazare and Chaussee-d'Antin, Faubourg du Roule. Paul d'Ariste, La 
Vie et le monde du boulevard, 1830-1870 (Paris < 1930>), pp. 255-256. [07a,2] 

"Women are not allowed in the Stock Exchange when prices are being quoted, but 
they can be seen standing around in groups outside, impatiently awaiting the great 
oracle of the day." Acht Tmge in Paris (Paris, July 1855), p. 20. [07a,3] 

"In the thirteenth arrondissement there are women who expire as they begin to 
make love; they whisper to love a last sweet nothing." Louis Lurine, Le Treizieme 
Arrondissement de Paris (Paris, 1850), pp. 219-220. A nice expression for the Lady 
of Camellias, who appeared two years later. <See Ol0a,7> [07a,4] 

At the time of the Restoration: "It was no disgrace to gamble. . . . Through the 
coming and going of soldiers, who were almost always adept at games of chance, 
the Napoleonic, wars had spread abroad the pleasure of gambling." Egon Caesar 
Conte Corti, Der Zauberer von Homburg und Monte Carlo (Leipzig <1932>), 
p. 30. [07a,5] 

January 1, 1838. "After the prohibition, the French hankers in the Palais-Royal, 
Benazet and Chabert, departed for Baden-Baden and Wieshatlen, and many em- 
ployees went to Pyrmont, Aachen, Spa, and elsewhere." Egon Caesar Conte Corti, 
Der Zauberer von Homburg und Monte Carlo (Leipzig), pp. 30-31. [07a,6] 

Front M. J . Ducos (de Gondriu), Comment on se mine a la Bourse (Paris, 1858): 
"In no way desiring to attack legitimate rights, I have nothing to say against the 
serious operations of the Stock Market, operations for which stockbrokers were 
specifically created. My criticism concerns the commissions charged on fictitious 
markets, ... as well as the usurious earnings" (p. 7). "No matter how favorahle it 
might happen to he, there is no luck, in the playing of the Stock Exchange, that 



o 



could withstand the exorbitant commissions of the stockbrokers. . . . On the 
Rhine, there are two gambling establishments (at Homburg and Wiesbaden) where 
they conduct a game of trente et quarante in which a slight commission of 62'/a 
centimes for every 100 francs is deducted in advance. . . . This is . . . one thirty- 
second of the stockbroker's commission and the earnings combined. Trente et 
quarante is played for red and black, just as on the Stock Market one plays for the 
rise and fall, with the difference that the odds are always exactly the same with the 
former and any kind of fraud is impossible — the weak, there, being not at all at the 
mercy of the strong" <p. 16>. [07a,7] 

In the provinces, speculation on the Stock Exchange was dependent on "getting 
news from Paris . . . about the fluctuations in the exchange of the most important 
stocks. . . . Special couriers and carrier pigeons had to serve this end, and one of 
the favorite methods in a France that, in those days, was dotted with windmills was 
to transmit signals from mill to mill. If the window of one of these mills was opened, 
that meant a rise in prices, and the signal was taken up by nearby mills and passed 
on; if the window remained closed, then a fall in prices was indicated. And the 
news traveled in this way, from mill to mill, out of the capital and into the prov- 
inces." The Blanc brothers, however, preferred to make use of the optical tele- 
graph, which was legally reserved for the government. "One fine day in 1834, at 
the request of an agent for Blanc, a Parisian telegraphist in an official telegram 
sent an U to Bordeaux, which was supposed to indicate a rise in stocks. In order to 
mark this letter, and also to guard against discovery, he inserted after the U a 
symbol denoting error." Difficulties cropped up along this route, and so the Blancs 
combined this method with another. "If, for example, the French stocks at 3 
percent showed an advance of at least 25 centimes, then the Paris agent for the 
Blancs, a certain Gosmand, sent a packet containing gloves to the telegraph official 
in Tours, whose name was Guibout, and who was prudently addressed on the 
parcel as a manufacturer of gloves and stockings. But if there was a decline of at 
least the same amount, then Gosmand sent stockings or neckties. The address 
written on this packet carried a letter or a number which Guibout then immedi- 
ately dispatched, together with the error symbol, in an official telegram to Bor- 
deaux." This system functioned for about two years. Reported in the Gazette des 
Tribunaux of 1837. Egon Caesar Conte Corti, Der Zauberer von Homburg unci 
Monte Carlo (Leipzig <1932>), pp. 17-19. (08,1] 

Amorous Conversations of Two Girls of the Nineteenth Century at Fireside (Rome 
and Paris: Verlag Grangazzo, Vache & Cie). Some remarkable formulations: "Ah, 
ass and cunt, how simple these words, and yet so expressive. Look at me now — 
how do you like my ass, then, and my cnnt, dear Lise?" (p. 12). "In the temple the 
sacrifice!-, in the anus the forefinger as sexton, on the clitoris two fingers as dea- 
cons; and thus I awaited the things that should come there. Tf my ass is in the right 
position, then please, my friend, begin!'"" The names of the two girls: Elise and 
Lindamine. [08,2] 



Lecomte on the fashion correspondent Constance Aubert, who had an important 
position at he Temps, and whose articles were paid for with deliveries of fashion- 
able items from the houses about which she had written: "The pen becomes a true 
source of capital which, day by day, can fix the amount of revenue one wishes to 
obtain. All of Paris becomes a bazaar where nothing escapes the hand that reaches 
for it. It's already been quite a while since this hand was extended." Jules 
Lecomte, Les Lettres de Van Engelgom, ed. Henri d'Almeras (Paris, 1925), 
p. 190. Lecomte's letters first appeared in 1837 in the Independant of Brussels. 

[08a,l] 

"It is hy the tendency of the mind called reminiscence that the wishes of the man 
condemned to the glittering captivity of cities incline . . . toward a stay in the 
country, toward his original abode, or at least toward the possession of a simple, 
tranquil garden. His eyes aspire to rest on some greenery, sufficiently far away 
from the stresses of the shop counter or the intrusive rays of the living room lamp. 
His sense of smell, continually assaulted by pestilent emanations, longs for the 
scent of flowers. A border of modest and mild violets would altogether ravish his 
senses. . . . Tliis happiness . . . denied him, he would push the illusion so far as to 
transform the ledge of his window into a hanging garden, and the mantelpiece of 
his unassuming parlor into an enamel bed of blossoms and leaves. Such is the man 
of the city, and such is the source of his passion for the flowers of the fields. . . . 
These reflections induced me to set up a number of looms on which I had weavers 
make designs imitating the flowers of nature. . . . The demand for these kinds of 
shawls was enormous. . . . They were sold before being made; the orders for their 
delivery streamed in. . . . This brilliant period of shawls, this golden age of manu- 
facture . . . did not last long, yet in France it resulted in a virtual goldmine, from 
which flowed wealth that was all the more considerable in that its main source was 
foreign. Along with the fact of this remarkable demand, it may be of interest ... to 
know in what manner it generally propagated itself. Just as I had expected, Paris 
bought up very few shawls with natural flowers represented on them. It was the 
provinces that demanded these shawls, in proportion to their distance from the 
capital; and foreign countries, in proportion to their distance from France. And 
their reign is not yet over. I still supply countries all across Europe, where there is 
hardly a chance for a shawl of cashmere hearing artificial designs. . . . On the hasis 
of what Paris did not do in the case of shawls with natural-flower designs, . . . 
couldn't one conclude, recognizing Paris as the real center of taste, that the far- 
ther one gets from this city, the closer one comes to natural inclinations and feel- 
ings; or, in other words, that taste and naturalness have, in this case, nothing in 
common — and are even mutually exclusive?" J. Rey, Manufacturer of Cashmere 
Shawls, Etudes pour servir a Vhistoire des chiles (Paris, 1823), pp. 201-202, 
204—206. The copy in the Bibliotheque Nationale contains, on the frontispiece, an 
inscription by an early reader: "This treatise on a seemingly trivial subject ... is 
remarkable for the purity and elegance of its style, as well as for an erudition 
worthy of Anarcharsis." [08a,2] 



Should the flower fashions of the Biedermeier period and the Restoration be 
linked t o a n unconscious discomfort with the growth o f the bigcides? [08a,3] 



"At the beginning of the reign of Louis Philippe, public opinion was also [like that 
of today concerning the Stock Market] opposed to games of chance. . . . The 
Chamber of Deputies . . . voted for their suppression, even though the state de- 
rived from them an annual revenue of twenty million francs. ... At the present 
time, in Paris, play on the Stock Market does not provide anything like twenty 
million per year to the government; but, on the other hand, it does produce at least 
one hundred million for those stockbrokers, outside brokers, 9 and usurers . . . 
who reported earnings . . . , raising at times the interest rate to above 20 per- 
cent. — These hundred million are won from the four or five thousand undiscern- 
ing players who, by seeking naively to take advantage of one another, get 
completely taken themselves" (that is, by the stockbrokers). M. J. Ducos (de Gon- 
drin), Comment on se mine a la Bourse (Paris, 1858), pp. v— vi. [09,1] 

During the July Revolution, the Stock Exchange was used as a military hospital 
and munitions factory. Prisoners were employed in the manufacture of grapeshot. 
See Tricotel, Esquisse de quelques scenes de Vinterieur de la Bourse <Paris, 
1830>. It was also used as a treasury. Silverware looted from the Tuileries was 
brought tbere. [09,2] 

There were shawls that took twenty-five to thirty days to weave. [09,3] 

Rey argues in favor of French cashmeres. Among other things, they have the 
advantage of being new. Which Indian shawls are not. "Need I mention all the 
revels it has witnessed, all the torrid scenes — to say no more — it has served to veil? 
Our modest and discreet Frenchwomen would be more than a little embarrassed if 
they came to know the antecedents of that shawl which makes them so happy!" 
Nevertheless, the author does not wish to endorse the opinion according to which 
all shawls have already been worn in India — a proposition just as false as that 
"which says that the tea coming out of China has already been steeped." J. Rey, 
Etudes pour servir a Vhistoire des chales (Paris, 1823), pp. 226-227. [09,4] 

The first shawls appear in France in the wake of the Egyptian campaign. 10 

[09,5] 

Onward, my sisters, march on, night and day, 
At every hour, and at every price, to make love. 
Herehelow we are constrained by fate 
To save the home and all respectable women. 



A. Barbier, Satires et poemes: Lazare (Paris, 1837), p. 271; cited in Liefde, he 
Saint-Simonisme dans la poesie franqaise <entre 1825 et 1865 (Haarlem, 1927)>, 
p. 125. [09,6] 



In the sixteenth section of Baudelaire's Spleen de Paris, "L'Horloge" <The Clock>, 
we come upon a conception of time which can be compared to that of the 
gambler. [09,7] 



Regarding the influence of fashion on erotic life, a telling observation by Eduard 
Fuchs (Die Karikatur der europauchen Volker, vol. 2 <Munich, 1921>, p. 152): 
"Women of the Second Empire do not say, 'I love him,' but rather, 'I fancy 
him' — 'J'ai un caprice pour lui." > [09,8] 

J. Pellcoq depicts the high-kicking leg in the cancan with the inscription: "Present 
arms!" Eduard Fuchs, Die Karikatur der europdischen Volker, vol. 2, p. 171. 

[09a,l] 

"Many of the galante lithographs puhlished in the 1830s featured simultaneous 
obscene variations for the lover of directly erotic images. . . . Toward the end of 
the Thirties, these novelties passed gradually out of fashion." Eduard Fuchs, 
Illustrierte Sittengeschichte vom Mittelalter bis zur Gegenivart: Das biirgerliche 
Zeitalter, supplement (Munich), p. 309. [09a,2] 

Eduard Fuchs mentions "the appearauce of an illustrated catalogue of prostitutes, 
which could date from 1835-184.0. The catalogue in question consists of twenty 
erotiti lithographs in color, each one of which has printed at the bottom the address 
of a prostitute." Five different arcades figure among the first seven addresses in 
the catalogue. Eduard Fuchs, Illustrierte Sittengeschichte vom Mittelalter bis zur 
Gegenivart: Das biirgerliche Zeitalter, supplement (Munich), p. 157. [09a,3] 

As Engels was being trailed hy police agents, in consequence of statements made hy 
itinerant German artisans (among whom his agitation, up until the weakening of 
Grii n's position, had met with little success), he writes to Marx: "If the suspicious- 
looking individuals who have heen following me for the past fourteen days really 
are police spies, . . . then Headquarters will have handed out, of late, a good many 
admission tickets to the bals Montesquieu, Valentino, Prado, and the rest. I am 
indebted to M. Delessert for an acquaintance with some very lovely grisettes and 
for much plaisir." 11 Cited in Gustav Mayer, Friedrich Engels, vol. 1, Friedrich 
Engels in seiner Friihzeit, 2 ml ed. (Berlin <1933>), p. 252. 

[09a,4] 

In 1848, on a trip through France's wine-producing regions, Engels discovers 
"that each of these wines produces a different intoxication, and that with a few 
bottles you can pass through ... all intermediate stages, from the Musard qua- 
drille to the Marseillaise, from the mad gaiety of the cancan to the wild ardor of 
revolutionary fever." Cited in Gustav Mayer, Friedrich Engels, vol. 1, Friedrich 
Engels in seiner Friihzeit (Berlin), p. 319. 12 [09a,5] 



"After the Cafe de Paris closed in 1856, the Cafe Anglais came to occupy a position 
during the Second Empire corresponding to that of the Cafe de Paris during the 
reign of Louis Philippe. It was a tall white building with a maze of corridors and 
innumerable public and private rooms." S. Kracauer, Jacques Offenbach and das 
Paris seiner Zeit( Amsterdam, 1937), p. 332. Ki [09a,6] 

"The factory workers in France call the prostitution of their wives and daughters 
the X' 1 ' working hour, which is literally correct." Karl Marx, Der historische Mate- 
rialismus, ed. Landshut and Mayer (Leipzig <1932>), p. 318. 1,1 [010,1] 

"The print seller . . . will provide, on request, the address of the model who has 
posed for his obscene photographs." Gabriel Pelin, Les Laideurs dn beau Paris 
(Paris, 1861), p. 153. In the shops of these imagiers, obscene pictures of individual 
models were hung in the window, while pictures of groups were found inside. 

[010,2] 

Dance halls, according to Le Caricaturiste of August 26, 1849: Salon du Sauvage, 
Salon d'Apollon, Chateau des Brouillards. Paris sons la Republique de 1848, 
Exposition of the City of Paris (Paris, 1909), p. 40. [Ol0,3] 

"The regulation of the hours of work . . . was the first rational bridle on the 
murderous, meaningless caprices of fashion — caprices that consort so badly with 
the system of modern industry." Footnote here: "John Bellers remarked as far 
back as 1699: 'The uncertainty of fashions does increase necessitous poor' (Essays 
about the Poor, Manufactures, Trade, Plantations, and Immorality, p. 9)." Karl 
Marx, Das Kapital, ed. Korsch (Berlin <1932>), p. 454. 15 [Ol0,4] 

From the Petition des filles publiques de Paris a MM. le Prefet de police etc., 
redigee par Mile. Pauline et apostillee par MM. les epiciers, cabaretiers, li- 
monadiers et marchands de comestibles de la capitale . . . : "The business in itself 
is unfortunately quite ill-paid, but with the competition of other women and of 
elegant ladies, who pay no taxes, it has become wholly unprofitable. Or are we all 
the more blameworthy because we take cash while they take cashmere shawls? The 
city charter guarantees personal freedom to everyone; if our petition to Monsieur 
le Prefet proves unavailing, then we shall . . . apply to the Chambers. Otherwise, 
it would he better to live in the kingdom of Goleonda, where girls of our sort 
formed one of the forty-four divisions of the populace and, as their sole responsi- 
bility, had only to dance before the king — which service we are prepared to render 
His Honor the prefect, should he ever wish it." Friedrich von Raumer, Briefe aus 
Paris u nd Frankreich im Jahre 1830 (Leipzig, 1831), vol. 1, pp. 206-207. 

[010,5] 

The author of the preface to Journet's Poesies speaks of "workshops involving 
different kinds of needlework, where, . . . for forty eentimes per day, the women 



and young girls with no work would . . . squander . . . their . . . health. Nearly all 
of these unfortunate women . . . are forced to fall back on the fifth quarter of their 
day." Jean Journet, Poesies et chants harmoniens (Paris: A la Lihrairie Uni- 
verselle de Joubert, 2 Passage dn Saumon, et chez l'auteur, June 1857), p. lxxi 
(Editor's preface). [Ol0,6] 

"Le Trottoir de la Rue des Martyrs" cites many of Gavami's captions but makes 
no mention at all of Guys, who nevertheless could have furnished the immediate 
model for the following description: "It is a pleasure to see them walking down 
this asphalt pavement, one side of their dress hitched up jauntily to the knee, so 
as to flash in the sun a leg fine and nervous as that of an Arabian horse, full of 
exquisite quivers and tremors, and terminating in a half-boot of irreproachable 
elegance. Wlio cares about the morality of these legs ! . . . What one wants is to 
go where they go." Alfred Delvau, Les Dessous de Paris (Paris, 1860), pp. 143-44 
("Les Trottoirs parisiens" <Parisian Sidewalks>). [O10a,l] 

Proposal of Gamin's: To use part of the proceeds from the state lottery as income 
for gamblers who have reached a certain age. [Ol0a,2] 

Lottery agents: "Their shops always have two or three exits and several compart- 
ments, so as to facilitate the overlapping operations of gambling and usury and to 
show consideration for timid customers. It is not unusual for man and wife, with- 
out suspecting a tiling, to be sitting right beside each other in these mysterious 
cubicles, which each thinks to utilize so cunningly alone." Carl Gustav Jochmann, 
Reliquien, ed. Heinrich Zschokke, vol. 2 (Hechingen, 1837), p. 44 ("Die Gliicks- 
spiele" <Games of Chance>). [Ol0a,3] 

"If it is the belief in mystery that makes believers, then there are evidently more 
believing gamblers in the world than believing worshipers." Carl Gustav 
Jochmann, Reliquien, ed. Heinrich Zschokke, vol. 2 (Hechingen, 1837), p. 46 
("Die Gliicksspiele"). [Ol0a,4] 

According to Poisson, "Memoire sur les chances que les jeux de hasarcl, adniis 
dans les maisons de jeu de Paris, presentent a la hanque" (Report on the Odds 
Presented to the Bank by the Games of Chance Operating in the Gambling Houses 
of Paris >, as read before the Academy of Sciences in 1820, the yearly turnover in 
trente-et-un was 230 million francs (bank's earnings, 2,760,000); in roulette, 100 
million francs (with the bank earning 5,000,000). See Carl Gustav Jochmann, 
Reliquien, ed. Heinrich Zschokke, vol. 2 (Hechingen, 1837), p. 51 ("Die Gliicks- 
spiele"). [Ol0a,5] 

Gambling is the inf ernal counterpart to the music of the heavenly hosts. 

[Ol0a,6] 



On Halevy's Froufrou: ''''Les Filles de marbre had introduced the age of the courte- 
san, and Froufrou marked its end. . . . Froufrou breaks down under the . . . 



strain of knowing that her life is ruined, and finally she returns to her family, a 
dying woman." S. Kracauer, Jacques Offenbach unci das Paris seiner Zeit (Am- 
sterdam, 1937), pp. 385-386. The comedy Les Filles de marbre was an answer to 
Dumas' La Dame aux camelias of the year before. 16 [Ol0a,7] 

"The gamhler is driven by essentially narcissistic and aggressive desires for om- 
nipotence. These, insofar as they are not immediately linked to directly erotic 
desires, are characterized hy a greater temporal radius of extension. A direct 
desire for coitus may, through orgasm, he satisfied more rapidly than the narcis- 
sist-aggressive desire for omnipotence. The fact that genital sexuality, in even the 
most favorable cases, leaves a residue of dissatisfaction goes hack, in turn, to three 
facts: not all pregenital desires, such as later are subsidiary to genitality, can he 
accommodated in coitus; and from the standpoint of the Oedipus complex, the 
object is always a surrogate. Together with these two . . . considerations goes . . . 
the fact that the impossibility of acting out large-scale unconscious aggression 
contributes to the lack of satisfaction. The aggression abreacted in coitus is very 
much domesticated. . . . Thus it happens that the narcissistic and aggressive 
fiction of omnipotence becomes ahove all a cause of suffering: whoever on that 
account has experienced the mechanism of pleasure as abreacted in games of 
chance, and possessing, as it were, eternal value, succumhs the more readily to it 
in proportion as he is committed to the 'neurotic pleasure in duration' (Pfeifer); 
and, as a consequence of pregenital fixations, he is less able to assimilate such 
pleasure to normal sexuality. ... It should also be borne in mind that, according 
to Freud, the sexuality of human beings bears the stamp of a function that dwin- 
dles, whereas this cannot in any way be predicated of the aggressive and narcissis- 
tic tendencies." Edmund Bergler, "Zur Psychologie des Hasardspielers," Imago, 
22, no. 4(1936), pp. 438-440. [Oll.l] 

"The game of chance represents the only occasion on which the pleasure principle, 
and the omnipotence of its thoughts and desires, need not be renounced, and on 
which the reality principle offers no advantages over it. In this retention of the 
infantile fiction of omnipotence lies posthumous aggression against the . . . author- 
ity which has 'inculcated' the reality principle in the child. This unconscious 
aggression, together with the operation of the omnipotence of ideas and the experi- 
ence of the socially viable repressed exhibition, conspires to form a triad of pleas- 
ures in gambling. This triad stands opposed to a triad of punishments constituted 
from out of the unconscious desire of loss, the unconscious homosexual desire for 
domination, and the defamation of society. ... At the deepest level, the game of 
chance is love's will to be extorted by an unconscious masochistic design. This is 
why the gambler always loses in the long run." Edmund Bergler, "Zur Psychologie 
des Hasardspielers," Imago, 22, no. 4 (1936), p. 440. [Oil, 2] 

Brief account of Ernst Simmel's ideas on the psychology of the gamhler: "The 
insatiable greed that finds no rest within an unending vicious circle, where loss 
becomes gain and gain hecomes loss, is said to arise from the narcissistic compul- 



sion to fertilize and give birth to oneself in an anal birth fantasy, surpassing and 
replacing one's own father and mother in an endlessly escalating process. 'Thus, 
in the last analysis, the passion for gambling satisfies the claim of the bisexual 
ideal, which the narcissist discovers in himself; at stake is the formation of a 
compromise between masculine and feminine, active and passive, sadistic and 
masochistic; and in the end it is the unresolved decision between genital and anal 
libido that confronts the gambler in the well-known symbolic colors of red and 
black. The passion for gambling thus serves an autoerotic satisfaction, wherein 
betting is foreplay, winning is orgasm, and losing is ejaculation, defecation, and 
castration. 1 " Edmund Bergler, "Zur Psychologie des Hasardspielers," Imago, 22, 
no. 4 (1936), pp. 409-410; with reference to Ernst Simmel, "Zur Psychoanalyse 
des Spielers "Internationale Zeitschriftfiir Psychoanalyse, 6 (1920), p. 397. 

[Olla.l] 

With the discovery of Tahiti, declares Fourier, with the example of an order in 
which "large-scale industry" is compatible with erotic freedom, "conjugal slav- 
ery" has become unendurahle.' 7 [OHa,2] 

Apropos of Freud's conjecture that sexuality is a dwindling function "of" the 
human being, Brecht remarked on how the bourgeoisie in decline differs from 
the feudal class at the time of its downfall: it feels itself to be in all things the 
quintessence of humankind in general, and hence can equate its own decline with 
the death of humanity. (Tbis equation, moreover, can play a part in the unmistak- 
able crisis of sexuality within the bourgeoisie.) The feudal class, by virtue of 
privileges, felt itself to be a class apart, which corresponded to the reality. That 
enabled it, in its waning, to manifest some elegance and insouciance. [OHa,3] 

Love for the prostitute is the apotheosis of empathy with the commodity. 

[OHa,4] 

Magistrate of Paris! March with the system, 
Pursue the good work of Mangin and Belleyme: 
Design, as chateaux for the filthy Phrynes, 
Pestilent, lonely, and dark qumrtiers. 

<Auguste-Marseille> Barthelemy, Paris: Revue satirique a M. G. Delessert (Paris, 
1828), p. 22. [012,1] 

A description of the lower class of prostitute that had settled in the vicinity of the 
city gate, the barriere. It comes from Du Camp, and would make an excellent 
caption for many of Guys's watercolors: "If one pushes open the barrier and the 
door that closes the entrance, one finds oneself in a bar furnished with marble or 
wooden tables and lighted by gas; through the clouds of smoke given off by the 
pipes, one distinguishes garbage men, diggers, carters — drinkers, for the most 
part — seated before a flask of absinthe and talking to creatures who are as gro- 
tesque as they are pitiable. All of these creatures are dressed, in almost the same 



way, in that red cotton fabric that is dear to African Negroes, and out of which 
the curtains in little provincial inns are made. What covers them cannot be called 
a dress; it is a beltless smock, puffed up with a crinoline. Exposing the shoulders 
with an outrageously low cut, and coming just to the level of the knees, this outfit 
gives them the look of large, inflated children, prematurely aged and glistening 
with fat, wrinkled, dazed, and with those pointed heads that are the sign of 
imbecility. When the inspectors, checking the registration book, call them and 
they get up to reply, they have all the charm of a circus dog." Maxime Du Gamp, 
Paris: Ses organes, ses fonctions et sa vie dans la seconde moitie du XIX siecle, vol. 3 
(Paris, 1872), p. 447 ("La Prostitution"). (012,2) 

"The basic principle ... of gambling . . . consists in this: . . . that each round is 
independent of the one preceding. . . . Gambling strenuously denies all acquired 
conditions, all antecedents . . . pointing to previous actions; and that is what dis- 
tinguishes it from work. Gamhling rejects . . . this weighty past which is the main- 
stay of work, and which makes for seriousness of purpose, for attention to the long 
term, for right, and for power. . . . The idea of beginning again, . . . and of doing 
better, . . . occurs often to one for whom work is a struggle; but the idea is . . . 
useless, . . . and one must stumble on with insufficient results." Alain <Emile- 
Auguste Chartier>, Les Idees et les ages < Paris, 1927 >, vol. 1, pp. 183-184 ("Le 
Jeu"). [Ol2,3] 

The lack of consequences that defines the character of the isolated experience 
<Erlebnis> found drastic expression in gambling. During the feudal age, the latter 
was essentially a privilege of the feudal class, which did not participate directly in 
the production process. What is new is that in the nineteenth century the bour- 
geois gambles. It was above all the Napoleonic armies that, on their campaigns, 
became the agents of gambling f or the bourgeoisie. [ 0 1 2 a , 1 ] 

The significance of the temporal element in the intoxication of the gambler has 
been noticed before this by Gourdon, as well as by Anatole France. But these two 
writers see only the meaning time has for the gambler's pleasure in his winnings, 
which, quickly acquired and quickly surrendered, multiply themselves a hun- 
dredfold in his imagination through the numberless possibilities of expenditure 
remaining open and, above all, through the one real possibility of wager, of mi se 
en jeu. What meaning the factor of time might have for the process of gambling 
itself is at issue in neither Gourdon nor France. And the pastime of gambling is, 
in fact, a singular matter. A game passes the time more quickly as chance comes 
to light more absolutely in it, as the number of combinations encountered in the 
course of play (of coups) is smaller and their sequence shorter. In other words, the 
greater the component of chance in a game, the more speedily it elapses. This 
state of affairs becomes decisive in the disposition of what comprises the authen- 
tic "intoxication" of the gambler. Such intoxication depends on the peculiar 
capacity of the game to provoke presence of mind through the fact that, in rapid 
succession, it brings to the fore constellations which work — each one wholly 



independent of the others — to summon up in every instance a thoroughly new, 2 

original reaction from the gambler. This fact is mirrored in the tendency of _^ 

gamblers to place their bets, whenever possible, at the very last moment — the ^ 

moment, moreover, when only enough room remains for a purely reflexive >jj 

move. Such reflexive behavior on the part of the gambler rules out an "interpre- 8 
tation" of chance. The gambler's reaction to chance is more like that of the knee 

to the hanuner in the patellar reflex. [Ol2a,2] § 



The superstitious man will be on the lookout for hints; the gambler will react to 
them even before they can be recognized. To have foreseen a winning play 
without having made the most of it will cause the uninitiated to think that he is 
"in luck" and has only to act more quickly and courageously the next time 
around. In reality, this occurrence signals the fact that the sort of motor reflex 
which chance releases in the lucky gambler failed to materialize. It is only when it 
does not take place that "what is about to happen" as such, comes clearly to 
consciousness. [Ol3,l] 

Only the future that has not entered as such into his consciousness is parried by 
the gambler. [Ol3,2] 

The proscription of gambling could have its deepest roots in the fact that a 
natural gift of humanity, one which, directed toward the highest objects, elevates 
the human being beyond himself, only drags him down when applied to one of 
the meanest objects: money. The gift in question is presence of mind. Its highest 
manifestation is the reading that in each case is divinatory. [Ol3,3] 

The peculiar feeling of happiness in the one who wins is marked by the fact that 
money and riches, otherwise the most massive and burdensome things in the 
world, come to him from the fates like a joyous embrace returned to the full. 
They can be compared to words of love from a woman altogether satisfied by her 
man. Gamblers are types to whom it is not given to satisfy the woman. Isn't Don 
Juan a gambler? [Ol3,4] 

"During the period of facile optimism, such as radiated from the pen of an Alfred 
Capus, it was customary on the boulevard to attribute everything to luck." 
Gaston Rageot, "Qu'est-ce qu'un evenement?," Le Temps, April 16, 1939. — The 
wager is a means of conferring shock value on events, of loosing them from the 
contexts of experience. 18 It is not by accident that people bet on the results of 
elections, on the outbreak of war, and so on. For the bourgeoisie, in particular, 
political affairs easily take the form of events on a gaming table. This is not so 
much the case for the proletarian. He is better positioned to recognize constants 
in the political process. [013,5] 



The Cemetery of the Innocents as promenade. "Such was the place which the 
Parisians of the fifteenth century frequented as a sort of lugubrious counterpart to 



the Palais-Royal of 1789. ... In spite of the incessant burials and exhumations 
going on there, it was a public lounge and a rendezvous. Shops were established 
before the charnel houses, and prostitutes strolled under the cloisters." J. Huiz- 
inga, Herbst des Mittelalters (Munich, 1928), p. 210. 19 [013a,l] 

Are fortunetelling cards more ancient than playing cards? Does the card game 
represent a pejoration of divinatory technique? Seeing the future is certainly 
crucial in card games, too. [013a,2] 

Money is what gives life to number; money is what animates the marble maiden 
(see07,l). [013a,3] 

Gracian's maxim — "In all things, know how to win time to your side" — will be 
understood by no one better and more gratefully than the one to whom a 
long-cherished wish has been granted. With this, compare the magnificent defini- 
tion which Joubert gives of such time. It defines, contrariwise, the gambler's 
time: "There is time even in eternity; but it is not a terrestrial or worldly time. . . . 
It destroys nothing; it completes." J. Joubert, Pensees (Paris, 1883), vol. 2, p. 162. 

[013a,4] 

Concerning the heroic element in gambling — as it were, a corollary to Baude- 
laire's poem "Le Jeu": "A thought which regularly crosses my mind at the gam- 
bling table . . . : What if one were to store up all the energy and passion . . . which 
every year is squandered ... at the gaming tables of Europe — would one have 
enough to make a Roman people out of it, and a Roman history? But that's just 
it. Because each man is born a Roman, bourgeois society aims to de-Romanize 
him, and thus there are games of chance and games of etiquette, novels, Italian 
operas and stylish gazettes, casinos, tea parties and lotteries, years of apprentice- 
ship and travel, military reviews and changing of the guard, ceremonies and 
visits, and the fifteen or twenty close-fitting garments which daily, with a salutary 
loss of time, a person has to put on and take off again — all these have been 
introduced so that the overabundant energy evaporates unnoticed!" Ludwig 
Bome, Gesammelte Schriften (Hamburg and Frankfurt am Main, 1862), vol. 3, 
pp. 38-39 ("Das Gastmahl der Spieler" <Gamblers' Banquet>). [013a,5] 

"But can you realize what delirium, what frenzy, possesses the mind of a man 
impatiently waiting for a gambling den to open? Between the evening gambler and 
the morning gambler the same difference exists as between the nonchalant hus- 
band and the ecstatic lover waiting under his mistress's window. It is only in the 
morning that quivering passion and stark need manifest themselves in all their 
horror. At that time of day, you can stare in wonderment at the true gambler — one 
who has not eaten or slept, lived or thought, so cruelly has he been scourged by the 
lash of his vice. ... At that baleful hour, you will meet with eyes whose steady calm 
is frightening, with faces that hold you spellbound; you will intercept gazes which 
lift the cards and greedily peer beneath them. Gaming-houses then reach sublimity 



only at opening time." Balzac, La Peau de chagrin, Editions Flammarion (Paris), 
p. 7. 20 [014,1] 

Prostitution opens a market in feminine types. [014,2] 

On gambling: the less a man is imprisoned in the bonds of fate, the less he is 
determined by what lies nearest at hand. [014,3] 

The ideal of the shock-engendered experience <Erlebnis> is the catastrophe. This 
becomes very clear in gambling: by constantly raising the stakes, in hopes of 
getting back what is lost, the gambler steers toward absolute ruin. [014,4] 