[The Streets of Paris] 

In short, the streets of Paris 
Were set to rhyme. Hear how. 

— Beginning of Dit des rues de Paris, by Guillot (Paris, 1875), with 
preface, notes, and glossary by Edgar Marcuse (first word of the 
second line in the original: "Was") 

We leave an imprint each time we enter into a history. 1 



They spoke of Paris as la ville qui remue — the city that never stops moving. But 
no less important than the life of this city's layout is here the unconquerable 
power in the names of streets, squares, and theaters, a power which persists in the 
face of all topographic displacement. Those little theaters which, in the days of 
Louis Philippe, still lined the Boulevard du Temple — how often has one of them 
been torn down, only to resurface, newly built, in some other quartier. (To speak 
of "city districts" is odious to me.) How many street names, even today, preserve 
the name of a landed proprietor who, centuries earlier, had his demesne on their 
ground. The name "Chateau d'Eau," referring to a long-vanished fountain, still 
haunts various arrondusements today. Even the better-known eating estab- 
lishments are, in their way, assured of their small municipal immortality — to say 
nothing of the great literary immortality attaching to the Rocher de Cancall, the 
\€four, the Trois Freres Provencaux. For hardly has a name made its way in the 
field of gastronomy, hardly has a Vatel or a Riche achieved its fame, than all of 
Paris, including the suburbs, is teeming with Petits Vatels and Petits Riches. Such 
is the movement of the streets, the movement of names, which often enough run 
at cross-purposes to one another. [Pl,l] 

And then the timeless little squares that suddenly are there, and to which no 
name attaches. They have not been the object of careful planning, like the Place 
\endome or the Place des Greves, and do not enjoy the patronage of world 
history, but owe their existence to houses that have slowly, sleepily, belatedly 
assembled in response to the summons of the centuiy. In such squares, the trees 
hold sway; even the smallest afford thick shade. Later, however, in the gaslight, 
their leaves have the appearance of dark-green frosted glass near the street lamps, 



and their earliest green glow at dusk is the automatic signal for the start of spring 
in the big city. [Pl,2] 



The Quartier de l'Europe already existed as a project, incorporating the names of 



On February 4, 1805, houses were first numbered, by imperial decree. Previous 
attempts to do this — in January 1726 — had met with violent resistance. Owners of 
houses declared themselves ready to number the side entrances, but not their 
carriage entrances. The Revolution had already introduced the numbering of 
houses according to districts; in some districts, there were 1,500-2,000 numbers. 



After the assassination of Marat, Montmartre was renamed Mont-Marat. [PI, 5] 

The function of the saints in the naming of Parisian streets suddenly became 
clear during the Revolution. To be sure, the Rues Saint-Honore, Saint-Roch, and 
Saint- Antoine were, for a while, known as Honore, Roch, and Antoine, but it 
could not take hold; a hiatus had opened up that to the ear of the Frenchman was 
unendurable. [PI, 6] 

"An enthusiast of the Revolution once proposed transforming Paris into a map of 
the world: all streets and squares were to be rechristened and their new names 
drawn from noteworthy places and things across the world." Pursue this in 
imagination and, from the surprising impression made by such an optical- 
phonetic image of the city, you will recognize the great importance of street 
names. Pinkerton, Mercier, and C. F. Cramer, Ansichten der Hauptstadt des fran- 
zbsuchen Kauerreichs vomjahre 1806 an, vol. 1 (Amsterdam, 1807), p. 100 (ch. 8, 
"Neologie," by Pinkerton). [Pl,7] 

There is a peculiar voluptuousness in the naming of streets. [PI ,8] 

"The name La Roquette, given to two prisons, a street, and an entire district, 
comes from the plant of that name (Eruca sativa), which used to flourish in for- 
merly uninhabited areas." La Grande Roquette was, for a long time, the prison in 
which those sentenced to death awaited the outcome of their appeal. Maxime Du 
Camp, Paris, vol. 3, p. 264. [Pl,9] 

The sensuality in street names — certainly the only sort which citizens of the 
town, if need be, can still perceive. For what do we know of streetcorners, curb- 
stones, the architecture of the pavement — we who have never felt heat, filth, and 
the edges of the stones beneath our naked soles, and have never scrutinized die 
uneven placement of the paving stones witii an eye toward bedding down on 



the European capitals, in 1820. 



[Pl,3] 



[P1.4] 



them. 



[PU«] 



"Pont d'Austerlitz! Its famous name evokes for me something quite other than the 
battle. Despite what people have maintained to me, and which I accept for form's 
sake, it was the battle that took its name from the bridge. An explanation for this 
took shape in my mind on the basis of my reveries, my recollection of distracted 
schooldays, and analogies in the savor and sound of certain words. As a child, I 
always kept this explanation under my hat; it was part of my secret language. And 
here it is: at the time of wars, crusades, and revolutions, on the eve of battle, the 
warriors would proceed with their ensigns to this bridge, old as the hills, and 
there, in all solemnity, would drink a cup of austerlitz. This austerlitz, formidable 
brew, was quite simply the hydromel of our ancestors, the Gauls, but more bitter 
and more filled with seltzer." Charles Vildrac < Charles Messager>, <Les> Ponts de 
Paris < Paris, ca. 1930 >. [Pla,l] 

Excursus on the Place du Maroc. Not only city and interior but city and open air 
can become entwined, and this intertwining can occur much more concretely. 
There is the Place du Maroc in Belleville: that desolate heap of stones with its 
rows of tenements became for me, when I happened on it one Sunday afternoon, 
not only a Moroccan desert but also, and at the same time, a monument of 
colonial imperialism; topographic vision was entwined with allegorical meaning 
in this square, yet not for an instant did it lose its place in the heart of Belleville. 
But to awaken such a view is something ordinarily reserved for intoxicants. And 
in such cases, in fact, street names are like intoxicating substances that make our 
perceptions more stratified and richer in spaces. One could call the energy by 
which they transport us into such a state their vertu evocatrice, their evocative 
power — but that is saying too little; for what is decisive here is not the association 
but the interpenetration of images. This state of affairs may be adduced, as well, 
in connection with certain pathological phenomena : the patient who wanders the 
city at night for hours on end and forgets the way home is perhaps in the grip of 
this power. [Pla,2] 

Street names in Jean Brunet, he Messianisme — organisation generate de Paris: 
Sa constitution generate, part 1 (Paris, 1858): Boulevard of Financiers, Boule- 
vard of Jewelers, Boulevard of Merchants, Boulevard of Manufacturers, Boule- 
vard of Metalworkers, Boulevard of Dyers, Boulevard of Printers, Boulevard of 
Students, Boulevard of Writers, Boulevard of Artists, Boulevard of Administra- 
tors. — Quartier Louis XIV (detailed argument for this name, p. 32, involving "em- 
bellishment" of the Saint-Martin and Saint-Denis gateways): Confection Street, 
Exportation Square, Ceramics Street, Bookbinding Street. [Pla,3] 

"I read of a geographic scheme in which Paris would be the map, and hackney 
coaches the professors. Certainly, I would rather have Paris be a geographic map 
than a volume in the Roman calendar; and the names of saints, with which the 
streets are baptized, cannot compare, in either euphony or utility, with the names 
of the towns that have been proposed as substitutes for them. Thus, the Faubourg 
Saint-Denis, according to this plan, would be called the Faubourg de Valenci- 



ennes; the Faubourg Saint-Marceau would become the Faubourg de Marseille; the 
Place de Greves would be known as the Place de Tours or de Bourges; and so on." 
Mercier, Le Nouveau Paris <Paris, 1800> , vol. 5, p. 75. [Pla,4] 



Rue des Immeubles Industriels — How old is this street? [Pla,5] 

A surprising argument, a hundred years ago, in favor of an American system for 
demarcating streets: "You poor professors, who teach moral philosophy and 
belles lettres! Your names are posted in small black letters on a streetcorner, above 
a milestone. The name of this jeweler is as dazzling as a thousand fires — it shines 
like the sun. It is for sale, but it is expensive." Mercier, Le Nouveau Paris, vol. 4, 
pp. 74-75. [PI a, 6] 

Apropos of the theory of street names: "Proper names, too, have an effect that is 
conceptually unburdened and purely acoustic. . . . To borrow an expression from 
Curtius (p. 65), proper names are "bare formulas" which Proust can nil up with 
feelings because they have not yet been rationalized by language." Leo Spitzer, 
Stilstudien (Munich, 1928), vol. 2, p. 434. [Pla,7) 

"Street," to be understood, must be profiled against the older term "way." With 
respect to their mythological natures, the two words are entirely distinct. The 
way brings with it the terrors of wandering, some reverberation of which must 
have struck the leaders of nomadic tribes. In the incalculable turnings and resolu- 
tions of the way, there is even today, for the solitary wanderer, a detectable trace 
of the power of ancient directives over wandering hordes. But the person who 
travels a street, it would seem, has no need of any way wise guiding hand. It is not 
in wandering that man takes to the street, but rather in submitting to the monoto- 
nous, fascinating, constantly unrolling band of asphalt. The synthesis of these 
twin terrors, however — monotonous wandering — is represented in the labyrinth. 
D Antiquity D [P2,l] 

Whoever wishes to know how much at home we are in entrails must allow 
himself to be swept along in delirium through streets whose darkness greatly 
resembles the lap of a whore. D Antiquity D [P2,2] 

How names in the city, though, first become potent when they issue within the 
labyrinthine halls of the Metro. Troglodytic kingdoms — thus they hover on the 
horizon: Solferino, Italie and Rome, Concorde and Nation. Difficult to believe 
that up above they all run out into one another, that under the open sky it all 
draws together. D Antiquity D [P2,3] 

The true expressive character of street names can be recognized as soon as they 
are set beside reformist proposals for their normalization. For example, Pujoulx's 
proposal for naming the streets of Paris after the cities and localities of France, 
taking into consideration their geographic positions relative to one another, as 



well as their population, and having regard for rivers and mountains, whose 
names would go especially to long streets which cross several districts — all of this 
"in order to provide an ensemble such that a traveler could acquire geographic 
knowledge of France within Paris and, reciprocally, of Paris within France." J. B. 
Pujoulx, Paris a la Jin du dix-huitieme siecle (Paris, 1801), p. 81. D Flanerie D 

[P2,4] 

"Seventeen of the gates correspond to imperial routes. ... In these names, one 
would seek in vain for a general system. What are Antihes, Toulouse, and Bale 
doing there beside La Villette and Saint-Ouen? ... If one had wanted to establish 
some distinctions, one could have given to each gate the name of the French city 
most distant in that direction." E. de Lahedolliere, Histoire du nouvemu (Paris), 
p. 5. [P2,5] 

"Some beneficial measures by the municipal magistracy date from the time of the 
Empire. On November 3, 1800, there was, by decree, a general revision of street 
names. Most of the grotesque vocables invented by the Revolution disappeared. 
The names of politicians were almost all replaced by the names of military men." 
Lucien Dubech and Pierre d'Espezel, Histoire de Paris (Paris, 1926), p. 336. 

[P2,6] 



"In 1802, in various neighborhoods — Rue du Mont-Blanc, Chaussee d'Antin — 
sidewalks were built, with an elevation of three or four inches. There was then an 
effort to get rid of the gutters in the center of the streets." Lucien Dubech and 
Pierre d'Espezel, Histoire de Paris (Paris, 1926), p. 336. [P2,7] 

"In 1805, the new system of sequential numhering of houses, begun on the initia- 
tive of Frochot and still in effect today: even numbers separated from odd, the 
even numbers on the right and the odd on the left, according as one moves away 
from the Seine or follows its course. The numbers were white and were placed on a 
red background in streets parallel to the river, on a black background in streets 
perpendicular to it." Lucien Dubech and Pierre d'Espezel, Histoire de Paris 
(Paris, 1926), p. 337. [P2,8] 

Around 1830: "The Chaussee d'Antin is the neighborhood of the nouveaux riches 
of the financial world. All these districts in the western part of town have been 
discredited: the city planners of the period believed that Paris was going to develop 
in the direction of the saltpeter works, an opinion that ought to instill prudence in 
today's developers. ... A lot on the Chaussee d'Antin had trouble finding a buyer 
at 20,000 to 25,000 francs." Dubech and d'Espezel, Histoire de Paris (Paris, 
1926), p. 364. [P2a,l] 



July Monarchy: "While most of the street names recalling political events were 
done away with, new ones appeared commemorating a date: the Rue du 29 Juil- 
let." Duhech and d'Espezel, Histoire de Paris, p. 389. [P2a,2] 



"I know nothing more ridiculous and more inconsistent than the names of streets, 
squares, blind alleys, and culs-de-sac in Paris. Let us choose at random some of 
these names in one of the more beautiful neighborhoods, and we cannot but note 
this incoherence and caprice. I arrive by the Rue Croix-des-Petits-Champs; I 
cross the Place des Victoires; I turn into the Rue Vuide-Gousset, which takes me to 
the Passage des Petits-Peres, from which it is only a short distance to the Palais- 
Egalite. What a salmagundi! The first name calls to mind a cult object and a rustic 
landscape; the second offers military triumphs; the third, an ambush; the fourth, 
the memory of a nickname given to a monastic order; and the last, a word which 
ignorance, intrigue, and ambition have taken turns abusing." J. B. Pujoulx, Paris 
a la fin du XVIII* siecle (Paris, 1801), pp. 73-74. [P2a,3] 

"Two steps from the Place de la Bastille in the Faubourg Saint-Antoine, people still 
say, 'I am going to Paris'. . . . This suburb has its own mores and customs, even its 
own language. The municipality has numbered the houses here, as in all other 
parts of Paris; but if you ask one of the inhabitants of this suburb for his address, 
he will always give you the name his house bears and not the cold, official num- 
ber. . . . This house is known by the name 'To the King of Siam,' that by 'Star of 
Gold' ; this house is called 'Court of the Two Sisters, 1 and that one is called 'Name 
of Jesus'; others carry the name 'Basket of Flowers,' or 'Saint Esprit,' or 'Bel 
Air,' or 'Hunting Box,' or 'The Good Seed.'" Sigmund Englander, Geschichte der 
franzdsischenArbeiterassociationen (Hamburg, 1864), vol. 3, p. 126. [P2a,4] 

Excerpt from a proposal for naming streets which presumably stems from the 
Revolution: "Someone . . . proposed giving streets and alleys the names of virtues 
and generous sentiments, without reflecting that this moral nomenclature was too 
limited for the great number of streets to be found in Paris. . . . One senses that in 
this project there was a certain logic in the arrangement of names; for example, the 
Rue de la Justice, or that of V 'Humanite, had necessarily to lead to the Rue du 
Bonheur, . . . while the Rue de la Probite . . . had to cross all of Paris in leading to 
the most beautiful neighborhoods." J. B. Pujoulx, Paris a la fin du XV I IP siecle 
(Paris, 1801), pp. 83-84. [P2a,5] 

Concerning the magic of street names. Delvau on the Place Maubert: "It is not a 
square; it is a large blot, so full of filth and mire that even the lips sully themselves 
in pronouncing this name from the thirteenth century — not because it is old but 
because it exhales an odor of iniquity . . . which shocks the sense of smell." 
A. Delvau, Les Dessous de Paris (Paris, 1866), p. 73. [P2a,6] 

"It is not superfluous to observe that a foreigner, who, on arriving in a city, starts 
out everywhere judging by appearances, could well suppose, in coming upon these 
unsystematic and insignificant street names, that the reasoning of those who live 
here was no less loosely connected; and, certainly, if several streets presented him 
with base or obscene names, he would have grounds for believing in the immorality 



of the inhabitants." J. B. Pujoulx, Paris a la fin du XVIII" siecle (Paris, 1801), 



Rationalism took particular offense at names like Rue des Mauvais-Garcons, Rue 
Tire-Boudin, Rue Mauvaises-Paroles, Rue Femme-sans-Tete, Rue du Chat qui 
Peche, Rue Courtaud-Villain. 2 It is such places that are frequented, says Pujoulx, 



"What a pleasure for the resident of the South of France to rediscover, in the 
names of the various districts of Paris, those of the place where he was born, of the 
town where his wife came into the world, of the village where he spent his early 
years." J. B. Pujoulx, Paris a la fin du XVIII' siecle (Paris, 1801), p. 82. [P3,3] 

"The hawkers choose their newspapers according to which neighborhoods they 
want to work in, and even within these areas there are nuances that must be 
distinguished. One street reads he Peuple, while another will have only La 
Reforme, but the street perpendicular to these, which connects them, takes L 'As- 
sembles nationale, or perhaps L'Union. A good hawker ought to be able to tell 
you, with an eye to the promises made by all the aspiring legislators and written 
upon our walls, what percentage of the vote in a particular arrondissement each of 
these political mendicants can expect to have." A. Privat d'Anglemont, Paris in- 
connu (Paris, 1861), p. 154. D Flaneur D [P3,4] 

What was otherwise reserved for only a very few words, a privileged class of 
words, the city has made possible for all words, or at least a great many: to be 
elevated to the noble status of name. This revolution in language was carried out 
by what is most general: the street. — Through its street names, the city is a 
linguistic cosmos. [P3,5] 

Apropos of Victor Hugo's "command of image. The few insights we have into his 
methods of composition conlirm that the faculty of interior evocation was much 
stronger in him than in other people. This is why he was able — from memory, and 
without taking any notes — to describe the quartier of Paris through which Jean 
Valjean escapes in Les Miserables; and this description is strictly accurate, street 
by street, house by house." Paul Bourget, obituary notice for Victor Hugo in the 
Journal des debuts: "Victor Hugo devant l'opinion" (Paris, 1885), p. 91. [P3,6] 

On an etching: "Rue Tirechape — in 1863 as it was in 1200." Cabinet des 
Estampes. [P3,7] 

In an engraving from 1830, one can see a man seated on a tree trunk in the 
Boulevard Saint-Denis. [P3,8] 



p. 77. 



[P3,l] 



by those who won't listen to his proposals. 



[P3,2] 



In 1865, *n the Boulevard des Capucines, at the corner of the Rue de Seze and the 
Rue Caumartin, the first ivfuge, or street-island, was installed. [P3a,l] 



"The way the cutups go to make faces at the entrance to the morgue; the way the 
showoffs come there to recite their grotesque jokes ... in such a place; the way the 
crowd . . . gathers around to laugh their lill at the often indecent antics of a 
juggler, after gaping at five cadavers laid out side by side. . . . Now, that's what I 
call revolting . . . !" Victor Fournel, Ce qu 'on voit dans les rues de Paris (Paris, 
1858), p. 355 ("La Morgue"). [P3a,2] 

Ghosts of the city: "Romanticism on the decline . . . delights in legends. While 
George Sand, dressed as a man, supposedly rides on horseback across Paris in the 
company of Lamartine, dressed as a woman, Dumas has his novels written in 
cellars and drinks champagne upstairs with various actresses. Or, better yet, Du- 
mas does not exist; he is only a mythical being, a trade name invented by a syndi- 
cate of editors." J. Lucas-Dubreton, La Vie d'Alexandre Dumas Pere (Paris 
<1928>), p. 141. [P3a,3] 

"Here, then, ... is the . . . Dictionnaire de la langue verte < Dictionary of Slang > , 
of which I would like people to say . . . what was said of Sebastien Mercier's 
Tableau de Paris — namely, that it was conceived in the street and written on a 
milestone." Alfred Delvau, Dictionnaire de la langue verte (Paris, 1866), p. iii. 

[P3a,4] 

A nice description of elegant neighborhoods: "the nobiUty, silently bunkered in 
these cloistral streets as in an immense and splendid monastery of peace and 
refuge." Paul-Ernest Rattier, Paris n'existe pas (Paris, 1857), p. 17. [P3a,5] 

Around 1860, the Paris bridges were still insufficient for the traffic between the 
two banks; there was frequent recourse to ferries. The fare for this service was two 
sous; proletarians, therefore, could only rarely make use of it. (From P.-E. Rat- 
tier, Paris n'existe pas (Paris, 1857), pp. 49-50. [P3a,6] 

"In Hugo, the Vendome Column, the Arc de Triomphe, and the Invalides go hand 
in hand, if I may put it this way. There is a historical and political, a real and 
literary connection among these three monuments. Today, . . . the position of these 
three terms, their relation, has changed. The Column has been effectively sup- 
planted, in spite of Vuillaume. And it is the Pantheon that has come, as it were, to 
replace it — especially since Hugo's success in bringing it to yield, so to speak, to 
the great men. Today, the trilogy of monuments is the Arc de Triomphe, the Pan- 
theon, and the Church of the Invalides." Charles Peguy, Oeuvres completes, 
1873-1914: Oeuvres de prose (Paris, 1916), p. 419 ("Victor-Marie, Comte Hugo"). 
<See C6; C6a,l, section IIL> [P3a,7] 

"The true Paris is by nature a dark, miry, malodorous city, confined within its 
narrow lanes, . . . swarming with bUnd alleys, culs-de-sac, and mysterious pas- 
sages, with labyrinths that lead you to the devil; a city where the pointed roofs of 
the somber houses join together up there near the clouds and thus begrudge you 



the bit of blue which the northern sky would give in alms to the great capital. . . . 
The true Paris is full of freak shows, repositories at three centimes a night for 
unheard-of beings and human phantasmagorias. . . . There, in a cloud of ammo- 
niac vapor, . . . and on beds that have not been made since the Creation, reposing 
side by side are hundreds, thousands, of charlatans, of match sellers, of accordion 
players, of hunchbacks, of the blind and the lame; of dwarfs, legless cripples, and 
men whose noses were bitten off in quarrels, of rubber- jointed men, clowns mak- 
ing a comeback, and sword swallowers; of jugglers who balance a greasy pole on 
the tips of their teeth . . . ; children with four legs, Basque giants and other kinds, 
Tom Thumb in his twentieth reincarnation, plant-people whose hand or arm is the 
soil of a living tree, which sprouts each year its crown of branches and leaves; 
walking skeletons, transparent humans made of light . . . and whose faint voice 
can make itself heard to an attentive ear . . . ; orangutans with human intelligence; 
monsters who speak French." Paul-Ernest de Rattier, Paris n'existe pas (Paris, 
1857), pp. 12, 17-19. To be compared with this are Hugo's drawings, and also 
Haussmann's vision of Paris. [P4,l] 

Fate of the republican opposition under Guizot. "L' Emancipation, of Toulouse, 
cites the words of a conservative to whom someone had expressed pity for the 
plight of those political prisoners languishing behind bars: 'I will feel sorry for 
them when mushrooms begin growing on their backs.'" Jean Skerlitch, L'Opinion 
publique en France d'apres la poesie politique et sociale de 1830 m 1848 
< Lausanne, 1901 > , pp. 162-163. [P4,2] 

"With this magic title of Paris, a play or review or book is always assured of 
success." Theophile Gautier, first sentence of the Introduction to Paris et les 
Parisiens au XIX" siecle (Paris, 1856), p. i. [P4,3] 

"The universe does nothing but gather the cigar hutts of Paris." Theophile Gau- 
tier, Introduction, Paris et les Parisiens au XIX" siecle (Paris, 1856), p. iii. [P4,4] 

"A long time ago, someone had the idea of peopling the Champs-Elysees with 
statues. The moment for this has still not arrived." Th. Gautier, "Etudes philoso- 
phiques," Paris et les Parisiens auXIH'' <siecle,> p. 27. [P4,5] 

"Thirty years ago ... it was still . . . virtually the sewer it had been in ancient 
times. A very large numher of streets, whose surface is now crowned, were then 
hollow causeways. You very often saw, at the low point where the gutters of a street 
or a square terminated, large rectangular gratings with great bars, the iron of 
which shone, polished by the feet of the multitude, dangerous and slippery for 
wagons, and making horses stumble. ... In 1832, in many streets, . . . the old 
Gothic cloaca still cynically showed its jaws. They were enormous, sluggish gaps of 
stone, sometimes surrounded by stone blocks, displaying monumental effront- 



ery." Victor Hugo, Oeuvres completes, novels, vol. 9 (Paris, 1881), p. 181 (Les 
Miserables)* [P4a,l] 



On the wall of the Farmers-General, under Louis XVI: "The mur < wall> by which 



As a legend of the morgue, Maillard cites the following remarks from E. Texier, he 
Tableau de Paris (1852): "In this building lives a clerk who . . . has a family. Who 
knows whether the clerk's daughter does not have a piano in her room and, on 
Sunday evenings, does not dance with her friends to the strains of the ritornellos of 
Pilodo or Musard." According to Maillard, however, the clerk did not live in the 
morgue in 1852. Cited in Firmin Maillard, Recherches historiqu.es et critiques sur 
la Morgue (Paris, 1860), pp. 26-27. The account goes hack, as Maillard himself 
explains, to a report of 1830 by Leon Gozlan, which for its part was somewhat 
feuilletonistic. [P4a,3] 

"The Place Maubert, accursed square which hides the name of Alhertus Magnus. " 
Paris chez soi < Paris, 1854>, p. 9 (Louis Lurine, "A travers les rues") . [P4a,4] 

In Mercier, JSouveau Paris (1800), vol. 6, p. 56, it is recounted that "the mysteri- 
ous hornblowers ... in fact made a pretty sinister noise. It was not to announce 
the sale of water that they made this noise; their lugubrious hlare, Signified fan- 
fare of terror, was most often a threat of arson: 'They were in the taverns, and 
they would communicate from one neighborhood to the next,' says Mercier. 'All 
their harmonized sounds were centrally coordinated, and when they played with 
redoubled force, one expected something to happen. You would listen for a long 
while, understanding nothing; but in all this uproar there was a language of sedi- 
tion. These plots were no less deep for being hatched so blatantly. It has been 
remarked that, at the time of the fi res, the signal was more prompt, more rapid, 
more shrill. When the hlaze broke out at Les Celestins, . . . my brain had been 
dulled the day before by the noise of the horns. On another occasion, the ears were 
assailed by the cracking of whips; on some days, it was a hanging on hoxes. One 
trembles at these keen daily alarms.'" Edouard Fournier, Enigmes des rues de 



C. Bougie, Chez les prophetes socialistes (Paris, 1918), cites, in the essay "L' Alli- 
ance intellectuelle franco-allemande" (p. 123), Borne's phrase about the streets of 
Paris: those glorious streets "whose pavement one ought to tread with hare feet 



Paris is immured makes Paris murmur. 



[P4a,2] 



Paris (Paris, 1860), pp. 72-73 ("Sur quelques bruits de Paris"). 



[P4a,5] 



only. 



[P5.1] 



The Avenue Rachel leads to the cemetery of Montmartre. Ahout this, Daniel 
Halevy writes (Pays parisiens [Paris <1932>], p. 276): "Rachel, the tragedienne, 
is here the herald and patroness." [P5,2] 



"The importance accorded the traffic of pilgrims — many people in those days went 
to venerate relics — is attested by the fact that the old Roman road, with its two 
sections, was named after the principal destinations of such pilgrimage: in the 
north, Saint-Martin, after the Cathedral of Tours; and in the south, Saint- 
Jacques, after the Spanish Jago di Compostella." Fritz Stahl, Paris (Berlin 
<1929>),p. 67. [P5,3] 

The oft-formulated observation that the neighborhoods of Paris each have a life 
of their own is given support by Stahl {Paris, p. 28) in a reference to certain 
Parisian monuments. (He speaks of the Arc de Triomphe, and one could also 
mention Notre Dame or Notre Dame de Lorette.) Forming a background to 
important streets, these buildings give their districts a center of gravity and, at the 
same time, represent the city as such within them. Stahl says "that each monu- 
mental edifice . . . appears with an escort, like a prince with his train of followers, 
and by this retinue it is separated from the respectfully withdrawing masses. It 
becomes the ruling nucleus of a neighborhood that appears to have gathered 
around it" (p. 25). [P5,4] 