[Panorama] 



Does anyone still want to go with me into a panorama? 

— Max Brod, Uber die Schonheit hasslkher Bilder 
(Leipzig, 1913), p. 59 



There were panoramas, 1 dioramas, cosmoramas, diaphanoramas, navaloramas, 
pleoramas (pled, "I sail," "I go by water"), fantoscope<s>, fantasma-parastases, 
phantasmagorical and fantasmaparastatic experiences, picturesque journeys in a 
room, georamas; optical picturesques, cineoi-amas, phanoramas, stereoramas, cy- 
cloramas, panorama dramatique. 

"In our time so rich in pano-, cosmo-, neo-, myrio-, kigo- and dio-ramas." M. G. 
Saphir, in the Berliner Courier, March 4, 1829; cited in Erich Stenger, Daguerres 
Diorama in Berlin (Berlin, 1925), p. 73. [Ql,l] 

The postrevolutionary Versailles as waxworks: "The leftover royal statues were 
remodeled. That of Louis XIV in the great Salle de l'Orangerie wears a liberty cap 
in place of the chiseled-away peruke, carries a pike instead of the official baton; 
and, so that no one mistakes the identity of the newly created god of war, there is 
written at the foot of the statue: 'French Mars, protector of the liberty of the 
world.' A similar prank was played with Coustou's colossal has-relief, repre- 
senting Louis XIV on horseback, in the large gallery of the chateau. The genius of 
fame, who descends from the clouds, holds a liberty cap over the hare head of the 
king, instead of the laurel wreath of former times." D Colportage D F. J. L. Meyer, 
Fragmente aus Paris im IV. Jahr der franzdsischen Republik (Hamburg, 1797), 
vol. 2, p. 315. [Ql,2] 

On the exhibition of a group of thieves reproduced in wax, which (around 1785) 
was put together hy Curtius or some other entrepreneur for the fair in Saint- 
Laurent: "Some were chained and clad in rags, while others were almost naked 
and lying on straw. It was a fairly graphic rendering. The only portraits that were 
likenesses were those of the two or three leaders; but since the gang was large, the 
owner had heen obliged to find them some company. I took it for granted that he 
had fashioned these others more or less according to whim, and with this thought 
in mind I was rather casually strolling past the swarthy faces — often obscured by 



the coarse moustaches of these inferior brigands — when I thought I perceived 
beneath their repulsive appearance some characteristics that were not at all unfa- 
miliar. As I looked more closely, I became convinced that the owner of the master 
thieves (who was also the owner of the other waxworks), wanting to make use of 
some wax figures that were no longer in fashion, or of some commissioned portraits 
that were subsequently rejected, had dressed them up in rags, loaded them with 
chains, and slightly disfigured them in order to place them here with the great 
thieves. ... I could not help smiling when I considered that the wife of one of the 
subjects might well discover, among these gentlemen, the portrait of her husband 
that had once been so gloriously commissioned. And, really, I am not joking when 
I say that I saw among this group an excellent likeness of Linguet,* who, several 
months earlier, had enjoyed a place of honor ixi the other room, and who undoubt- 
edly had been transported here for economic reasons, and to fill out the prison." 
(*Simon-Nicolas-Henri Linguet, 1736-1794; polygraph and lawyer; executed on 
the guillotine.) J. B. Pujoulx, Paris a lufindu XVIII' siecle (Paris, 1801), pp. 102- 



"Waiting" can be associated with the exhibition of imperial panoramas as much 
as with boredom. It is highly significant that Brod, in a gloss on "panorama" hits 
upon all the keywords of this investigation: "fashion," "boredom," "gaslight," 



"A melange of Morgue and Musee de Luxembourg": this was how Jules Claretie 
characterized the battle panoramas. La Vie d Paris, 1881 (Paris), p. 438. In these 
panoramas we perceive that wars, too, are subject to fashion. Max Brod, in his 
"Panorama," sees "inactive officers . . . searching about for suitable battlefields to 
wage their imaginary colonial wars." It is a wardrobe of battles: the impecunious 
come and look around to see if somewhere there is not a used battlefield they can 
make their own without going to great expense. [Ql ,5] 

Play on words with "-rama" (on the model of "diorama") in Balzac, at the begin- 
ning of Pere Goriot. 2 [ 0,1,6] 

Setup of the panoramas: View from a raised platform, surrounded by a balus- 
trade, of surfaces lying round about and beneath. The painting runs along a 
cylindrical wall approximately a hundred meters long and twenty meters high. 
The principal panoramas of the great panorama painter Prevost: Paris, Toulon, 
Rome, Naples, Amsterdam, Tilsit, Wagram, Calais, Antwerp, London, Florence, 
Jerusalem, Athens. Among his pupils: Daguerre. [Q, la ,l] 

1838: the Rotonde des Panoramas constructed by Hittorff. D Iron □ [Ql a >2] 



103.[]ColportageO 



[0.1-3] 



and so on. 



[0.1,4] 



Panorama at the Paris Exhibition of 1855. 



[Qla,3] 



A panorama under construction, in an image originally published in Llllustrtiion. Courtesy of 
the Syndicat Autoren- und Verlagsgesellschaf t, Frankfurt am Main. See Ql a, 1 . 



1 1 remains to b e discovered what is meant when, in the dioramas, the variations 
in lighting which the passing day brings to a landscape take place in fifteen or 
thirty minutes. Here is something like a sportive precursor of fast-motion cinema- 
tography — a witty, and somewhat malicious, "dancing" acceleration of time, 
which, by way of contrast, makes one think of the hopelessness of a mimesis, as 
Breton evokes it in Nadja: the painter who in late afternoon sets up his easel 
before the Vieux-Port in Marseilles and, in the waning light of day, constantly 
alters the light-relations in his picture, until it shows only darkness. For Breton, 
however, it was "unfinished.'" [Qla,4] 

To reflect rigorously on the particular pathos that lies hidden in the art of the 
panoramas. On the particular relation of this art to nature, but also, and above 
all, to history. How peculiar this relation was may be gathered from these sen- 
tences by Wiertz, whose painting, in fact, has a distinctly panoramic tendency. 
"There has been much talk of realism in painting. Generally speaking, paintings 
which are called 'realistic' are rarely in keeping with this rubric. Pure realism 
ought to manage things so that a represented object would seem within reach of 
your hand. ... If, in general, what is properly termed trompeToeil has been little 
appreciated, that is because up until now this genre of painting has been practiced 
only by mediocre painters, by sign painters, those restricted merely to the repre- 



sentation of certain still-life objects. . . . Will the example of M. Wiertz give birth 
to a new genre?" Commentary on La Curieuse, in the catalogue written by the 
painter himself and entitled L'Atelier de M. Wiertz. In Oeuvres litteraires <Paris, 
1870>, pp. 501-502. [Qla,5] 

"Nocturnorama. A new sort of concert will entertain the fashionable society of 
Paris this winter. All that the music expresses, during these concerts, will be ren- 
dered visible through painted transparencies of superior quality. Haydn's Crea- 
tion is in rehearsal and, accompanied by the appropriate phantasmagorias, will no 
doubt doubly captivate the senses of the audience. / To me, however, this arrange- 
ment seems more suited to gay and sentimental diversions than to this great work. 
/ Thus, for example, a strikingly lifelike and moving portrait of Malibran is to 
appear, while, behind the scenes, a very fine singer delivers an Italian aria — as 
though one were hearing the shade of Malibran sing." August Lewald, Album der 
Boudoirs (Leipzig and Stuttgart, 1836), pp. 42-43. [Qla,6] 

From time to time in his diorama, Daguerre would have, among other things, the 
Church of Saint-Etienne du Mont. Midnight Mass. With organ. At the end: extin- 
guishing of candles. [Ql a, 7] 

The fact that film today articulates all problems of modern form-giving — under- 
stood as questions of its own technical existence — and does so in the most 
stringent, most concrete, most critical fashion, is important for the following 
comparison of panoramas with this medium. "The vogue for panoramas, among 
which the panorama of Boulogne was especially remarkable, corresponds to the 
vogue for cinematographs today. The covered arcades, of the type of the Passage 
des Panoramas, were also beginning their Parisian fortunes then." Marcel Poete, 
Unellede cite Paris (Paris, 1925), p. 326. [Qla,8] 

<Jacques-Louis> David exhorted his students to make studies of nature in the 
panorama. [Ql a, 9] 

"Many people imagine that art can be perfected indefinitely. This is an error. 
There is a limit at which it stops. And here is why: it is because the conditions in 
which the imitation of nature is confined are immutable. One wants a picture — 
that is to say, a flat surface, surrounded or not surrounded by a frame — and on 
this surface a representation produced exclusively by means of various colored 
substances. . . . Within these conditions, which constitute the picture, everything 
has been attempted. The most difficult problem was perfect relief, deep perspec- 
tives carried to the most complete illusion. The stereoscope resolved it." A. J. 
Wiertz, Oeuvres litteraires (Paris, 1870), p. 364. This comment not only throws an 
interesting light on the points of view from which people looked at things like 
stereoramas in those days; it also shows very clearly that the theory of "progress" 
in the arts is bound up with the idea of the imitation of nature, and must be 
discussed in the context of this idea. [Q2,l] 



The multiple deployment of figures in the wax museum opens a way to the 
colportage phenomenon of space and hence to the fundamental ambiguity of the 
arcades. The wax statues and busts — of which one is today an emperor, tomor- 
row a political subversive, and the next day a liveried attendant; of which another 
represents today Julia Montague, tomorrow Marie Lafargue, the day after tomor- 
row Madame Doumergue — all are in their proper place in these optical whisper- 
ing-galleries. For Louis XI, it is the Louvre; for Richard II, the Tower; for Abdel 
Krim, the desert; and for Nero, Rome. □ Flaneur □ [Q2,2] 

Dioramas take the place of the magic lantern, which knew nothing of perspec- 
tive, but with which, of course, the magic of the light insinuated itself quite 
differently into residences that were still poorly lit. "Lanteme magique! Piece 
curieuse!" With this cry, a peddler would travel through the streets in the evening 
and, at a wave of the hand, step up into dwellings where he operated his lantern. 
The affiche for the first exhibition of posters still characteristically displays a 
magic lantern. [Q2,3] 

There was a georama for a while in the Galerie Colbert. — The georama in the 
fourteenth arrondissement contained a small-scale natural reproduction of 
France. 4 [Q2,4] 

In the same year in which Daguerre invented photography, his diorama burned 
down. 1839. D Precursors □ [Q2,5] 

There is an abundant literature whose stylistic character forms an exact counter- 
part to the dioramas, panoramas, and so forth. I refer to the feuilletonist miscella- 
nies and series of sketches from midcenttiry. Works like La Grande Ville <The Big 
City>, Le Diable a Paris <The Devil in Paris>, Les Frangau peints par eux-memes 
<The French as Painted by Themselves>. In a certain sense, they are moral 
dioramas — not only related to the others in their unscrupulous multiplicity, but 
technically constructed just like them. To the plastically worked, more or less 
detailed foreground of the diorama corresponds the sharply profiled feuilletonis- 
tic vesturing of the social study, which latter supplies an extended background 
analogous to the landscape in the diorama. [Q2,6] 

The sea — "never the same" 5 for Proust at Balbec, and the dioramas with their 
varied lighting, which sets the day marching past the viewer at exactly the speed 
with which it passes before the reader in Proust. Flere, the highest and the lowest 
forms of mimesis shake hands. [Q2,7] 

The wax museum <Panoptihim> a manifestation of the total work of art. The 
universalism of the nineteenth century has its monument in the waxworks. Pan- 
opticon: not only does one see everything, but one sees it in all ways. [Q2,8] 



<; Navalorama." Eduard Devrient, Briefe aus Paris (Berlin, 1840), p. 57. [Q2,9] 



Principal panoramic representations by Prevost for the panoramas of "passage." 
"Paris, Toulon, Rome, Naples, Amsterdam, Tilsit, Wagram, Calais, Antwerp, 
London, Florence, Jerusalem, and Athens. All were conceived in the same man- 
ner. His spectators, situated on a platform surrounded by a balustrade, as though 
on the summit of a central building, commanded a view of the entire horizon. Each 
canvas, affixed to the inner wall of a cylindrical room, had a circumference of 97 
meters, 45 centimeters, 2 millimeters (300 feet) and a height of 19 meters, 42 
centimeters (60 feet). Thus, the eighteen panoramas by Prevost represent a sur- 
face area of 86,667 meters, 6 centimeters (224,000 feet)." Labedolliere, Histoire 
du nouveau Paris (Paris), p. 30. [Q2a,l] 

In The Old Curiosity Shop, Dickens speaks of the "unchanging air of coldness and 
gentility" about the waxwork. 6 D Dream House D [Q2a,2] 

Daguerre and the Academy [Francaise?]: "Lemercier . . . gave me a ticket to a 
public session of the Institute. ... At this session he is going to recite a poem about 
Daguerre's machine <See Q3a,l> in order to revive interest in the thing, for the 
inventor lost his whole apparatus in a fire in his room. And so, during my sojourn 
in Paris, there was nothing to see of the wondrous operation of this machine." 
EduardDevrient, Briefe mus Paris (Berlin, 1840), p. 260 [letter of April 28, 1839]. 

[Q2a,3] 

In the Palais-Royal, the "Cafe du Mont Saint-Bernard, a very odd sight, on the 
first floor opposite the staircase. (A coffeehouse where, roundabout on the walls, 
are painted Alpine pastures. At the height of the tables is a small gallery in which 
miniature models constitute the foreground of the painting: small cows, Swiss 
chalets, mills, sowers [should perhaps be cowherds], and the like — a very odd 
sight.)" J. F. Benzenberg, Briefe geschrieben auf einer Reise nach Paris (Dort- 
mund, 1805), vol. 1, p. 260. [Q2a,4] 

A poster: "The French Language in Panorama." In J. F. Benzenberg, vol. 1, 
p. 265. In the same context, information concerning the regulation that applies to 
hillstickers. [Q2a,5] 

An exceptionally detailed description of the program at the Pierre Theatre 7 in 
Benzenberg, vol. 1, pp. 287-292. [Q2a,6] 

The interest of the panorama is in seeing the true city — the city indoors. What 
stands within the windowless house is the true. Moreover, the arcade, too, is a 
windowless house. The windows that look down on it are like loges from which 
one gazes into its interior, but one cannot see out these windows to anything 
outside. (What is true has no windows; nowhere does the true look out to the 
universe.) [Q?a,7] 



"The illusion was complete. I recognized at first glance all the monuments and all 
the places, down to the little courtyard where I lived in a room at the Convent of 
the Holy Savior. Never did a traveler undergo such an arduous trial; I could not 



have expected that Jerusalem and Athens would be transferred to Paris in order to 
convince me of truth or illusion." Chateaubriand, in the preface to his Itineraire 
de <Paris a> Jerusalem, cited in Emile de Labedolliere, Le Nouveau (Paris), p. 30. 

[Q3,i] 

The innermost glowing cells of the city of light, the old dioramas, nested in the 
arcades, one of which today still bears the name Passage des Panoramas. It was, 
in the first moment, as though you had entered an aquarium. Along the wall of 
the great darkened hall, broken at intervals by narrow joints, it stretched like a 
ribbon of illuminated water behind glass. The play of colors among deep-sea 
fauna cannot be more fiery. But what came to light here were open-air, atmo- 
spheric wonders. Seraglios were mirrored on moonlit waters; bright nights in 
deserted parks loomed large. In the moonlight you could recognize the chateau 
of Saint-Leu, where the last Conde was found hanged in a window. A light was 
still burning in a window of the chateau. A couple of times the sun splashed wide 
in between. In the clear light of a summer morning, one saw the rooms of the 
Vatican as they might have appeared to the Nazarenes; not far beyond rose 
Baden-Baden. But candlelight, too, was honored: wax tapers encircled the mur- 
dered Due de Berry in the dusky cathedral that served as mortuary chapel, and 
hanging lamps in the silken skies of an isle of love practically put round Luna to 
shame. It was an ingenious experiment on the moonstruck magic night of Ro- 
manticism, and its noble substance emerged from the trial victorious. [Q3,2] 

The waxwork figure as mannequin of history. — In the wax museum the past 
enters into the same aggregate state that distance enters into in the interior. 

[Q3,3] 

On the world-travel panorama, which operated under the name "Le Tour du 
Monde" at the Paris world exhibition of 1900, and which animated a changing 
panoramic background with living figures in the foreground, each time costumed 
accordingly. "The 'World-Tour Panorama' is housed in a building that has al- 
ready caused a general sensation because of its bizarre exterior. An Indian gallery 
crowns the walls of the edifice, while rising at the corners are the tower of a 
pagoda, a Chinese tower, and an old Portuguese tower." "Le Tour du Monde/' in 
Die Paruer Weltaasstellung in Wort und Bild, ed. Dr. Georg Malkowsky (Berlin, 
1900), p. 59. — The similarity of this architecture to that in zoological gardens is 
worth noting. [Q3,4] 

Three stages in Lemercier's Lampelie et Daguerre: (1) presentation of stationary 
panoramas; (2) presentation of the technique of their animation, which Daguerre 
got from Lampelie; (3) description of the overcoming of Lampelie by the tireless 
Daguerre. In the following, the first stage (the third under D Photography 0). 

Daguerre, in the tower where his erudite brush 
Makes a radiant theater of optics, 
Reveals in the dark of a giant enclosure 
Bright horizons of awesome perspective. 
His palette is magic; and his conihient lights, 



Diorama on the Rue de Bondy, 1837. Courtesy of the Bibliotheque Nationale de France. 
See Q3a,3. 



Once the scene is complete and in place all around, 
Transform a bare cloth covering circular walls 
To a mirror of nature itself. 

Nepomucene Lemercier, Sur la Decouverte de Vingenieux peintre du diorama 
[afterward: Lampelie et Daguerre] (Institut Royal de France, Annual Public Ses- 
sion of the Five Academies, Thursday, May 2, 1839, chaired by M. Chevreul, 
president [Paris, 1839], pp. 26-27). [Q3a,l] 

After the July Revolution, Dagnerre's diorama included a view of "la Place de la 
Bastille, July 28, 1830." Pinet, Histoire de VEcole polytechnique < Paris, 1887 >, 
p. 208. [Q3a,2] 

Dioramas at the Chateau d'Eau (later the Place de la Repuhlique) and on the Rue 
de Bondy. Cabinet des Estampes. [Q3a,3] 

A print advertising the manufacture of precision instruments, J. Molteni and Co., 
62 Rue du Chateau d'Eau, refers (after 1856!) to, among other things, "apparatus 
of phantasmagoria, polyoramas, dioramas, and such." Cabinet des Estampes. 

[Q3a,4] 

Empire vignette: "The Panorama." An illustration plate, linen or paper, showing 
tightrope walkers in the middle ground. Amor, with the pointed cap of a carnival 
clown or of a town crier, points to a puppet theater in the foreground, where a 



knight kneels before his lady while declaring his love. This all in a landscape. 
Cabinet des Estampes. [Q3a,5] 



"I prepared myself to receive the depositions of the women she called his pano- 
ramistes — that is to say, those who walk up and down all the panoramas, particu- 
larly the one on the Boulevard Montmartre." P. Cuisin, La Galanterie sous la 
sauvegarde des lois (Paris, 1815), pp. 136-137. [Q3ai6] 

"Carporama . . . specializing in the plants, flowers, and fruits of India." J.-L. 
Croze, "Quelques Spectacles de Paris pendant l'ete de 1835" (he Temps, August 
22, 1935). [Q3a,7] 

The panoramic principle in Balzac: "Our investigation has enabled us to take 
account of some three hundred real names in the Paris of the period 1800 to 1845, 
during which the characters of the Comedie humaine develop. If one added to this 
the political figures, the writers and playwrights, the celebrities of all kinds who 
. . . appear in Balzac's narratives . . . without any link to the action, the total 
would perhaps mount to five hundred." H. Clouzot and R.-H. Valensi, Le Paris de 
la Comedie humaine: Balzac et sesfournisseurs (Paris, 1926), p. 175. [Q4,l] 

Passage des Panoramas. "You will have guessed that this arcade owes its name to a 
particular spectacle introduced in France in January 1799. The first Panorama in 
Paris was under the direction of a man from the United States ... by the name of 
Robert Fulton. . . . Fulton, at the time of the plan to invade England, presented to 
the emperor a report on the immediate conversion of the imperial navy to 
steam. . . . Having been rejected in France, this engineer went on to succeed in 
America, and it is said that, when finally returning to Saint-Helene to die, the 
emperor saw through his spyglass a steamboat which bore the name The Fulton." 
Louis Lurine, "Les Boulevarts," in Paris chez soi (Paris < 1854>), p. 60. [Q4,2] 

Balzac: "When in 1822 he visits the diorama run by Daguerre, he enthusiastically 
calls it one of the miracles of the century — 'a thousand problems are resolved.' 
And when the daguerreotype is developed twenty years later, he allows a photo- 
graph of himself to he made and writes altogether deliriously of this invention, 
which he claims to have prophesied already in Louis Lambert (1835)." [Note at 
this point: Corriespondance (1876)>, vol. 1, p. 68 (compare Goriot); Lettres <d 
I'Etrangere) , vol. 2 <1906>, p. 36.] Ernst Robert Curtius, Balzac (Bonn, 1923), 
p. 237. [Q4,3] 

Dickens: "lliere floated before him a vision of a monstrous magazine, entirely 
written by himself. . . . One characteristic thing he wished to have in the peri- 
odical. He suggested an Arabian Nights of London, in which Gog and Magog, 
the giants of the city, should give forth chronicles as enormous as themselves." 
G. K. Chesterton, Dickens, trans. Laurent and Martin-Dupont (Paris, 1927), 
p. 81.' Dickens had numerous projects for serials. [Q4,4] 



The world exhibition of 1889 had a "Panorama Historique," put together by 
Stevens and Gervex, at the conclusion of which a white-haired Victor Hugo was 
shown before an allegorical monument of France, which in turn was flanked by 
allegories of labor and of national defense. [Q4,5] 

Balthasar's Feast, by the conductor and composer Jullien (circa 1836): "The chief 
role . . . devolved upon seven brilliantly colored transparents, which gleamed so 
fantastically in the darkness that Jullien's orchestra, instead of being the principal 
attraction, sank to being merely an accompaniment. This feast for the eyes, which 
was called a 'nocturnorama,' was produced by a mechanical device." S. Kracauer, 
Jacques Offenbach unci das Paris seiner Zeit (Amsterdam, 1937), p. 64.'' [Q4a,l] 

"Panorama" 1 " — the best known of the Greek-based coinages which emerged dur- 
ing the French Revolution. "On the seventh of Floreal, in the year VII, Rohert 
Fretton <Fulton?> took out a patent 'for the purpose of exhibiting circular pic- 
tures called "panoramas." 1 This first attempt would lead to the idea of a 'peri- 
panorama,' then a 'cosmorama,' and later a 'panstereorama' (1813)." Ferdinand 
Brunot, Histoire de let langue franqaise des origines jusqu'm 1900; vol. 9, La 
Revolution et V Empire; section 2, Les Evenements, les institutions et la. langue 
(Paris, 1937), p. 1212 ("Les Nomenclatures sous la Revolution"). [Q4a,2] 

From Joseph Dufour (1752-1827) we have "hanging tableaux" — strips twelve to 
fifteen meters long, illustrated in the manner of panoramas. They show landscapes 
(Bosporus, Italy), genre scenes (savages of the South Seas), mythologies. [Q4a,3] 

"I would rather return to the dioramas, whose brutal and enormous magic has the 
power to impose on me a useful illusion. I would rather go to the theater and feast 
my eyes on the scenery, in which I find my dearest dreams artistically expressed 
and tragically concentrated. These things, hecause they are false, are infinitely 
closer to the truth." Charles Baudelaire, Oeuvres, ed. Le Dantec, vol. 2 < Paris, 
1932 > , p. 273 ("Salon de 1859," section 8, "Le Paysage"). 11 [Q4a,4] 



In Balzac's works, the number of supernumeraries runs to fi ve hundred persons. 
Five hundred of his characters appear episodically without being integrated into 
the action. [Q4a,5] 