[Mirrors] 



The way mirrors bring the open expanse, the streets, into the cafe — this, too, 
belongs to the interweaving of spaces, to the spectacle by which the flaneur is 
ineluctably drawn. "During the day, often sober; in the evening, more buoyant, 
when the gas flames glow. The art of the dazzling illusion is here developed to 
perfection. The most commonplace tavern is dedicated to deceiving the eye. 
Through mirrors extending along walls, and reflecting rows of merchandise right 
and left, these establishments all obtain an artificial expansion, a fantastical mag- 
nitude, by lamplight." Karl Gutzkow, Briefe aus Paris (Leipzig, 1842), vol. 1, 
p. 225. 

Thus, precisely with the approach of night, distant horizons bright as day open 
up throughout the city. [Rl , 1 ] 

Here, in connection with the mirror motif, should be mentioned the story of the 
man who could not bear to have, in the interior of his shop or bistro, the legend 
on the outer windowpane incessantly before his eyes in mirror writing. To dis- 
cover an anecdote that accords with this. [Rl,2] 

Brittle, too, are the mosaic thresholds that lead you, in the style of the old 
restaurants of the Palais-Royal, to a "Parisian dinner" for five francs; they mount 
boldly to a glass door, but you can hardly believe that behind this door is really a 
restaurant. The glass door adjacent promises a "Petit Casino" and allows a 
glimpse of a ticket booth and the prices of seats; but were you to open it — would 
it open into anything? Instead of entering the space of a theater, wouldn't you be 
stepping down to the street? Where doors and walls are made of mirrors, there is 
no telling outside from in, with all the equivocal illumination. 1 Paris is the city of 
mirrors. The asphalt of its roadways smooth as glass, and at the entrance to all 
bistros glass partitions. A profusion of windowpanes and mirrors in cafes, so as to 
make the inside brighter and to give all the tiny nooks and crannies, into which 
Parisian taverns separate, a pleasing amplitude. Women here look at themselves 
more than elsewhere, and from this comes the distinctive beauty of the 
Parisienne. Before any man catches sight of her, she already sees herself ten times 
reflected. But the man, too, sees his own physiognomy flash by. He gains his 
image more quickly here than elsewhere and also sees himself more quickly 



merged with tliis, his image. Even the eyes of passersby are veiled mirrors, and 
over that wide bed of the Seine, over Paris, the sky is spread out like the crystal 
mirror hanging over the drab beds in brothels. [Rl,3] 

Where were these mirrors manufactured? And when did the custom of furnishing 
bars with them arise? [Rl,4] 

Since when the custom of inserting mirrors, instead of canvases, into the expensive 
carved frames of old paintings? [Rl,5] 

Let two mirrors reflect each other; then Satan plays his favorite trick and opens 
here in his way (as his partner does in lovers' gazes) the perspective on infinity. Be 
it now divine, now satanic: Paris has a passion for mirror-like perspectives. The 
Arc de Triomphe, the Sacre Coeur, and even the Pantheon appear, from a dis- 
tance, like images hovering above the ground and opening, architecturally, a fata 
morgana. D Perspective D [ R 1 , 6 ] 

At the end of the 1860s, Alphonse Karr writes that no one knows how to make 
mirrors any more. [Rl>7] 

That the last but also the greatest work of this mirror magic is still around to be 
seen is owing, perhaps, more to its high production costs than to its drawing 
power and profitability, which today are already on the decline. This work is the 
"Cabinet des Mirages" at the Musee Grevin. Here were united, one final time, 
iron supporting beams and giant glass panes intersecting at countless angles. 
Various coverings make it possible to transform these beams into Greek columns 
one moment, Egyptian pilasters the next, then into street lamps; and, according 
as they come into view, the spectator is surrounded with unending forests of 
Greco-Roman temple colunms, with suites, as it were, of innumerable railroad 
stations, market halls, or arcades, one succeeding another. A fluctuating light and 
gentle music accompany the performance, and coming before each transforma- 
tion is the classic signal of the hand bell, and the jolt, which we recognize from 
our earliest trips around the world, when, in the Kaiserpanorama, before our 
eyes that were full of the pain of departure, an image would slowly disengage 
from the stereoscope, allowing the next one to appear. [Rl,8] 

Mallarme as genius of mirrors. [Rla,l] 

"The manufacture of mirrors in Paris and Saint-Gobain, 'mirrors known all over 
Europe and without serious rival,' continues unabated." Levasseur, Histoire des 
classes ouvrieres <et de Vindustrie en France, de 1789 a 1870 (Paris, 1903)>, vol. 
1, p. 446. [Rla,2] 



"Our mirrors are growing larger by the day, which makes them more and more 
sought after throughout Europe. Today they are within range of the most middling 



fortune, and whereas there is scarcely a household in France that does not possess 
at least one or two, nothing is rarer in England than to come upon one of our 
mirrors, even in castles." Adolphe Blanqui, Histoire de I 'exposition des produits 
de I Industrie f ranqaise en 1827 (Paris, 1827), p. 130. [Rla,3] 

Egoistic — "that is what one becomes in Paris, where you can hardly take a step 
without catching sight of your dearly beloved self. Mirror after mirror! In cafes 
and restaurants, in shops and stores, in haircutting salons and literary salons, in 
baths and everywhere, 'every inch a mirror'!" S. F. Lahrs<?>, Briefe aus Paris, in 
Europa: Chronik der gebildeten Welt, ed. August Lewald (Leipzig and Stuttgart, 
1837), vol. 2, p. 206. [Rla,4] 

Redon paints things as if they appeared in a somewhat clouded mirror. But his 
mirror world is flat, averse to perspective. [Rla,5] 

"So long as the plate glass was produced solely through expansion of a glass cylin- 
der blown with the mouth at the end of the pipe, its dimensions had a constant and 
relatively confined limit, one determined by the lung power expended in the Mow- 
ing. Only recently was this replaced hy compressed air. But with the introduction 
of the casting process ... in 1688, these dimensions were immediately and sig- 
nificantly increased." A. G. Meyer, Eisenbauten (Esslingen, 1907), pp. 54—55. 
Note to this passage: "The first mirrors cast in Paris are said ... to have measured 
84 hy 50 inches, as compared to a maximum of 50 by 45 inches hef ore this." 

[Rla,6] 

Actually, in the arcades it is not a matter of illuminating the interior space, as in 
other forms of iron construction, but of damping the exterior space. [Rla,7] 

On the light that reigns in the arcades: "A glaucous gleam, seemingly filtered 
through deep water, with the special quality of pale brilliance of a leg suddenly 
revealed under a lifted skirt. The great American passion for city planning, im- 
ported into Paris by a prefect of police during the Second Empire and now being 
applied to the task of redrawing the map of our capital in straight lines, will soon 
spell the doom of these human aquariums. Although the life that originally quick- 
ened them has drained away, they deserve, nevertheless, to he regarded as the 
secret repositories of several modern myths." Louis Aragon, he Paysan de Paris 
(Paris, 1926), p. 19. 2 D Mythology D [R2,l] 

Outside surged "the green, transparent tide, filling the street to a level high above 
the houses; and there, up and down, swam the queerest fish, often nearly human 
in appearance. . . . The street itself could have come from some prehistoric book 
of images; gray gabled houses with high pointed roofs and narrow windows, the 
latter sometimes straight across, sometimes on a slant, the sides of the houses in 
some spots almost overgrown with shells and seaweed, though in other spots 
clean and well preserved, and adorned with tasteful paintings and shell 



figures. . . . Before every door stood a tall shady coral tree; and planted not 
infrequently along the walls, like the grapevines and roses we train on slender 
trellises at home, were polyps with spreading arms that reached in their luxuri- 
ance high above the windows, often to the very gables that protruded from the 
roofs." Friedrich Gerstacker, Die versunkene Stadt (<Berlin:> Neufeld and Henius, 
1921), p. 30. If a work of literature, an imaginative composition, could arise from 
repressed economic contents in the consciousness of a collective, as Freud says it 
can from sexual contents in an individual consciousness, then in the above de- 
scription we would have before our eyes the consummate sublimation of the 
arcades, with their bric-a-brac growing rankly out of their showcases. Even the 
vitreous radiance of the globes of the street lamps, the utter pomp and splendor 
of gas lighting, enters into this undersea world of Gerstacker's. The hero sees, to 
his amazement, "that, with the gradual infusion of twilight, these undersea corri- 
dors just as gradually lit up by themselves. For everywhere in the bushes of coral 
and sponge, among the wreaths and thick curtains of seaweed and the tall waving 
seagrass towering up behind, were sitting broad-brimmed, glassy-looking medu- 
sas, which already at the outset had given off a weak, greenish phosphorescent 
light that quickly picked up strength at the approach of darkness and now was 
shining with great intensity." Gerstacker, Die versunkene Stadt, p. 48. Here, the 
arcade in Gerstacker in a different constellation: "Hardly had they left the house 
than they entered into a wide and airy, crystal-crowned passageway, onto which 
nearly all the neighboring houses seemed to issue; just beyond this, however, and 
divided from it only by a perfectly transparent partition that appeared to be 
formed of thin sheets of ice, lay the luminous waters." Gerstacker, Die versunkene 
Stadt, p. 42. [R2,2] 

As rocks of the Miocene or Eocene in places bear the imprint of monstrous 
creatures from those ages, so today arcades dot the metropolitan landscape like 
caves containing the fossil remains of a vanished monster: the consumer of the 
pre-imperial era of capitalism, the last dinosaur of Europe. On the walls of these 
caverns their immemorial flora, the commodity, luxuriates and enters, like can- 
cerous tissue, into the most irregular combinations. A world of secret affinities 
opens up within: palm tree and feather duster, hairdryer and Venus de Milo, 
prostheses and letter-writing manuals. The odalisque lies in wait next to the 
inkwell, and priestesses raise high the vessels into which we drop cigarette butts 
as incense offerings. These items on display are a rebus: how one ought to read 
here the birdseed in the fixative-pan, the flower seeds beside the binoculars, the 
broken screw atop the musical score, and the revolver above the goldfish bowl — 
is right on the tip of one's tongue. After all, nothing of the lot appears to be new. 
The goldfish come perhaps from a pond that dried up long ago, the revolver was 
a corpus delicti, and these scores could hardly have preserved their previous 
owner from starvation when her last pupils stayed away. And since, to the dream- 
ing collective itself, the decline of an economic era seems like the end of the 
world, the writer Karl Kraus has looked quite correctly on the arcades, which, 
from another angle, must have appealed to him as the casting of a dream: "In the 



Berlin Arcade, there is no grass growing. It looks like the day after the end of the 
world, although people are still moving about. Organic life is withered, and in 
this condition is put on display. Castan's Panopticon. Ah, a summery day there, 
among the waxworks, at six o'clock. An orchestrion plays mechanical music to 
accompany Napoleon Ill's bladder-stone operation. Adults can see the syphilitic 
chancre of a Negro. Positively the very last Aztecs. Oleographs. Street youths, 
hustlers, with thick hands. Outside is life: a third-rate cabaret. The orchestrion 
plays 'You're a Fine Fellow, Emil.' Here God is made by machine." <Karl Kraus,> 
Macks (Vienna and Leipzig, 1924), pp. 201-202. [R2,3] 

On the Crystal Palace of 1851: "Of course, for sensuous perception, these glass 
surfaces are themselves practically dissolved in light. / In its basic principle, this 
is by no means something altogether new; rather, its prehistory goes hack centuries 
at least, if not millennia. For it begins with the decision to cover the walls with 
shining metal plates. / . . . That is the first step on the way to the new valuation of 
space at work in the Crystal Palace. In the domed chamber of the Mycenaeans, 
this conception of space was already so decidedly in force that the entire space of 
the room could be dissolved in luster ... In this way, however, one sacrificed that 
fundamental means of all spatial organization: contrast. The whole of the succeed- 
ing historical development was determined through this means — although, from 
the perspective of what concerns us at present, this development first begins only a 
thousand years later, and then no longer with the 'luster' of metal but with that of 
glass. / . . . The high point here is with the window of the Gothic cathedral. . . . 
The increasing transparency of glass in colorless glazing draws the outer world 
into the interior space, while covering the walls with mirrors projects the image of 
the interior space into the outer world. In either case the 'wall,' as a container of 
space, is deprived of its significance. The 'luster' increasingly forfeits the distinc- 
tive color that was part of its character and becomes ever more exclusively just a 
mirror of external light. / This process culminated in the profane interior space of 
the seventeenth century, where it was no longer only the embrasures of windows 
that were filled with plate glass clear as water, but also the remaining surfaces of 
the wall surrounding the room, particularly in places that lay opposite a window 
opening: in the 'mirror galleries of the rococo interiors.' / . . . But in this the 
principle of contrast still prevails. ... In the Sainte-Chapelle, however, as in 
<Versaille's> Hall of Mirrors, this relation between surface and light was consti- 
tuted in such a way that it is no longer the light that interrupts the surface area but 
the surface area that interrupts the light. / In terms of the unfolding valuation of 
space, therefore, we see a continuous progression. At its end stand the green- 
houses, and the halls of the Crystal Palace in London." A. G. Meyer, Eisenbauten 
(Esslingen, 1907), pp. 65-66. [R2a,l] 

One may compare the pure magic of those walls of mirrors which we know from 
feudal times with the oppressive magic worked by the alluring mirror-walls of 
the arcades, which invite us into seductive bazaars. □ Magasins de Nouveautcs □ 

[R2a,2] 



A look at the ambiguity of the arcades: their abundance of mirrors, which fabu- 
lously amplifies the spaces and makes orientation more difficult. For although 
this mirror world may have many aspects, indeed infinitely many, it remains 
ambiguous, double-edged. It blinks : it is always this one — and never nothing — 
out of which another immediately arises. The space that transforms itself does so 
in the bosom of nothingness. In its tarnished, dirty mirrors, things exchange a 
Kaspar-Hauser-look with the nothing. It is like an equivocal wink coming from 
nirvana. And here, again, we are brushed with icy breath by the dandyish name 
of Odilon Redon, who caught, like no one else, this look of things in the mirror 
of nothingness, and who understood, like no one else, how to join with things in 
their collusion with nonbeing. The whispering of gazes fills the arcades. There is 
no thing here that does not, where one least expects it, open a fugitive eye, 
blinking it shut again; but if you look more closely, it is gone. To the whispering 
of these gazes, the space lends its echo. "Now, what," it blinks, "can possibly 
have come over me?" We stop short in some surprise. "What, indeed, can pos- 
sibly have come over you?" Thus we gently bounce the question back to it. 



"Images of interiors are at the center of the early Kierkegaard's philosophical 
constructions. These images are, in fact, produced by philosophy, . . . but they 
point beyond this stratum in virtue of the things they hold fast. . . . The great motif 
of reflection belongs to the interiew. The 'seducer' begins a note: 'Why can't you 
he quiet and well behaved? You have done nothing the entire morning except to 
shake my awning, pull at my window mirror, play with the hell-rope from the third 
story, rattle the windowpanes — ill short, do everything possible to get my atten- 
tion!' . . . The window mirror is a characteristic furnishing of the spacious nine- 
teenth-century apartment. . . . The function of the window mirror is to project the 
endless row of apartment buildings into the encapsulated bourgeois living room; 
by this means, the living room dominates the refl ected row at the same time that it 
is delimited hy it." Theodor Wiesengrund-Adorno, Kierkegaard (Tubingen, 



lb be cited in reference to the physiologies, even though coming later, is the 
passage from the "Lettre a Charles Asselineau," in which Babou gives free rein to 
his nonconformist and antimodernist sentiments. "I know that the public of 
today, being the most seemly of all publics, loves to admire itself en jkmille in 
those very large mirrors which adorn the cafes of the boulevard, or which the 
hand of an arty decorator has kindly installed in its bedroom." Hippolyte Babou, 
Les Payens innocents (Paris, 1858), p. xviii. [R3,2] 



D Hanerie D a 



[R2a,3] 



1933), p. 45. 4 D Flaneur D Interior D 



[R3,l] 