[Painting, Jugendstil, Novelty] 

lb create history with the very detritus of history. 

— Remy de Gourmont, Le II"" Livre des masques (Paris, 1924), p. 259 

Events profit from not being commented on. 

— Alfred Delvau, Preface to Murailles revolutiomiaires (Paris), vol. 1, p. 4 

Pains eternal, 
And ever fresh, 
Hide from their hearts 
All your terrors. 

— Verse of die Devil, sung while he transforms a desolate and rocky 
landscape into a boudoir; from Hippolyte Lucas and Eugene Barre, 
Le Cielet I'afer: Feerie (Paris, 1853), p. 88 

Wliile procreation used to be the fashion, 
We think of that, pardon, as tripe. 

— Faust, Part 2 (Wagner in the homunculus scene) 1 



"History is like Janus: it has two faces. Whether it looks to the past or to the 
present, it sees the same things." <Maxime> Du Camp, Paris <Paris, 1869-1875), 
vol. 6, p. 315.0 Fashion D [Sl,l] 

"It has often happened to me to note certain trivial events passing before my eyes 
as showing a quite original aspect, in which I fondly hoped to discern the spirit of 
the period. 'This,' I would tell myself, 'was bound to happen today and could not 
have been other than it is. It is a sign of the times.' Well, nine times out of ten, I 
have come across the very same event with analogous circumstances in old mem- 
oirs or old history books." Anatole France, Le Jardin d'Epicure (Paris), p. 113. 2 
□ Fashion D [Sl,2] 

The change in fashions, the eternally up-to-date <das Exvig-Heutiga, escapes "his- 
torical" consideration; it is truly overcome only tlirough a consideration that is 
political (theological). Politics recognizes in every actual constellation the genu- 



inely unique-— what will never recur. Characteristic of a fashionable considera- 
tion, which proceeds from bad contemporariness, is the following item of infor- 
mation, which is found in Benda's La Irahuon des clercs <The Betrayal of the 
Intellectuals): a German reports his amazement when, sitting at a table d'hote in 
Paris fourteen days after the storming of the Bastille, he heard no one speak of 
politics. It is no different when Anatole France has the aged Pilate chatting in 
Rome of the days of his governorship and saying, as he touches on the revolt of 
the king of the Jews, "Now, what was he called?" 3 [SI, 3] 

Definition of the "modern" as the new in the context of what has always already 
been there. The always new, always identical "heathscape" in Kafka (Der Prozefi) 
is not a bad expression of this state of affairs. '"Wouldn't you like to see a picture 
or two that you might care to buy?' . . . Titorelli dragged a pile of unframed 
canvases from under the bed; they were so thickly covered with dust that when 
he blew some of it from the topmost, K. was almost blinded and choked by the 
cloud that flew up. 1 Wild Nature, a heathscape,' said the painter, handing K. the 
picture. It showed two stunted trees standing far apart from each other in darkish 
grass. In the background was a many-hued sunset. 'Fine,' said K., Til buy it.' K's 
curtness had been unthinking and so he was glad when the painter, instead of 
being offended, lifted another canvas from the floor. 'Here's the companion 
picture,' he said. It might have been intended as a companion picture, but there 
was not the slightest difference that one could see between it and the other; here 
were the two trees, here the grass, and there the sunset. But K. did not bother 
about that. 'They're fine prospects,' he said. Til buy both of them and hang them 
up in my office.' 'You seem to like the subject,' said the painter, fishing out a third 
canvas. 'By a lucky chance I have another of these studies here.' But it was not 
merely a similar study, it was simply the same wild heathscape again. The painter 
was apparently exploiting to the full this opportunity to sell off his old pictures. 
Til take that one as well,' said K. 'How much for the three pictures?' 'We'll settle 
that next time,' said die painter. ... 'I must say I'm very glad you like these 
pictures, and I'll throw in all the others under the bed as well. They're 
heathscapes every one of them — I've painted dozens of them in my time. Some 
people won't have anything to do with these subjects because they're too somber, 
but there are always people like yourself who prefer somber pictures."' Franz 
Kafka, Der Prozefi (Berlin, 1925), pp. 284-286. ' D Hashish D [SI ,4] 

The "modern," the time of hell. The punishments of hell are always the newest 
thing going in this domain. What is at issue is not that "the same thing happens 
over and over," and even less would it be a question here of eternal return. It is 
rather that precisely in that which is newest the face of the world never alters, that 
this newest remains, in every respect, the same.— This constitutes the eternity of 
hell. To determine the totality of traits by which the "modem" is defined would 
be to represent hell. [SI ,5] 

Of vital interest to recognize a particular point of development as a crossroads. 
The new historical thinking that, in general and in particulars, is characterized by 



higher concreteness, redemption of periods of decline, revision of periodization, 
presently stands at such a point, and its utilization in a reactionary or a revolu- 
tionary sense is now being decided. In this regard, the writings of the Surrealists 
and the new book by Heidegger 5 point to one and the same crisis in its two 



Remy de Gourmont on the "Histoire de la societe francaise pendant la Revolution 
et sous le Directoire": "It was the fundamental originality of the Goncourts to 
create history with the very detritus of history." Remy de Gourmont, Le II" m Livre 



"If one takes from history only the most general facts, those which lend them- 
selves to parallels and to theories, then it suffices, as Schopenhauer said, to read 
only the morning paper and Herodotus. All the rest intervening — the evident 
and fatal repetition of the most distant and the most recent facts — becomes 
tedious and useless." Remy de Gourmont, Le IT" Livre des masques (Paris, 1924), 
p. 259. The passage is not entirely clear. The wording would lead one to assume 
that repetition in the course of history concerns the great facts as much as the 
small. But the author himself probably has in mind only the former. Against this 
it should be shown that, precisely in the minutiae of the "intervening," the 
eternally selfsame is manifest. [Sla,2] 

The constructions of history are comparable to military orders that discipline the 
true life and confine it to barracks. On the other hand: the street insurgence of 
the anecdote. The anecdote brings things near to us spatially, lets them enter our 
life. It represents the strict antithesis to the sort of history which demands "empa- 
thy," which makes everything abstract. The same technique of nearness may be 
practiced, calendrically, with respect to epochs. Let us imagine that a man dies on 
the very day he turns fifty, which is the day on which his son is born, to whom 
the same thing happens, and so on. If one were to have the chain commence at 
the time of the birth of Christ, the result would be that, in the time since we 
began our chronological reckoning, not forty men have lived. Thus, the image of 
a historical course of time is totally transformed as soon as one brings to bear on 
it a standard adequate and comprehensible to human life. This pathos of near- 
ness, the hatred of the abstract configuration of history in its "epochs," was at 
work in the great skeptics like Anatole France. [Sla,3] 

There has never been an epoch that did not feel itself to be "modern" in the sense 
of eccentric, and did not believe itself to be standing directly before an abyss. The 
desperately clear consciousness of being hi the middle of a crisis is something 
chronic in humanity. Every age unavoidably seems to itself a new age. The 
"modem," however, is as varied in its meaning as the different aspects of one and 
the same kaleidoscope. <Gompare Nli,l.> [Sla,4] 



possible solutions. 



[S1.6] 



des masques (Paris, 1924), p. 259. 



[Sla,l] 



Connection between the colportage intention and the deepest theological inten- 
tion. It mirrors it back darkly, displaces into the space of contemplation what 



§ only holds good in the space of the just life. Namely: that the world is always the 
same (that all events could have taken place in the same space) . On a theoretical 
plane, despite everything (despite the keen insight lurking within it), this is a tired 
and withered truth. Nevertheless, it finds supreme confirmation in the existence 
g of the pious, to whom all things serve the greatest good, as here the space serves 
=3" all that has happened. So deeply is the theological element sunk in the realm of 
B colportage. One might even say that the deepest truths, far from having risen 
« ; above the animal torpor of human being, possess the mighty power of being able 
bB to adapt to the dull and commonplace — indeed, of mirroring themselves, after 
Jj their fashion, in irresponsible dreams. [Sla,5] 

No decline of the arcades, but sudden transformation. At one blow, they became 
the hollow mold from which the image of "modernity" was cast. Here, the 
century mirrored with satisfaction its most recent past. [Sla,6] 



Every date from the sixteenth century trails purple after it. Those of the nine- 
teenth century are only now receiving their physiognomy. Especially from the 
data of architecture and socialism. [Sla,7] 



Every epoch appears to itself inescapably modern — but each one also has a right 
to be taken thus. What is to be understood by "inescapably modern," however, 
emerges very clearly in the following sentence: "Perhaps our descendants will 
understand the second main period of history after Christ to have its inception in 
the French Revolution and in the turn from the eighteenth to the nineteenth 
century, while grasping the first main period in terms of the development of the 
whole Christian world, including the Reformation." At another place, it is a 
question of "a great period that cuts more deeply than any other into the history 
of the world — a period without religious founders, without ref onners or lawgiv- 
ers." Julius Meyer, Geschichte der modernen Franzosuchen Malerei (Leipzig, 1867), 
pp. 22, 21. The author assumes that history is constantly expanding. But this is, 
in reality, a consequence of the fact that industry gives it its truly epochal charac- 
ter. The feeling that an epochal upheaval had begun with the nineteenth century 
was no special privilege of Hegel and Marx. [Sla,8] 



The dreaming collective knows no history. Events pass before it as always identi- 
cal and always new. The sensation of the newest and most modern is, in fact, just 
as much a dream formation of events as "the eternal return of the same." The 
perception of space that corresponds to this perception of time is the interpene- 
trating and superposed transparency of the world of the flaneur. This feeling of 
space, this feeling of time, presided at the birth of modem feuilletonism. D Dream 
Collective D [S2,l] 



"What drives us into contemplation of the past is the similarity between what has 
been and our own life, which are somehow one being. Through grasping this 



identity, we can transport ourselves into even the purest of all regions — into S 
death." Hugo von Hofmannsthal, Buck derFreunde (Leipzig, 1929), p. 111." 

t S2 ' 2 ] m 

Very striking how Hofmaimsthal calls this "somehow one being" a being in the j§_ 
sphere of death. Hence the immortality of his "religious novice," that fictional 
character of whom he spoke during his last meeting with me, and who was c 
supposed to make his way through changing religions down the centuries, as 3_ 
through the suite of rooms of one grand apartment. 7 How it is that, within the ji 
narrowly confined space of a single life, this "being somehow one" with what has 2 
been leads into the sphere of death — this dawned on me for the first time in Paris, ?i 
during a conversation about Proust, in 1930. To be sure, Proust never heightened 
but rather analyzed humanity. His moral greatness, though, lies in quite another 
direction. With a passion unknown to any writer before him, he took as his 
subject the fidelity to things that have crossed our path in life. Fidelity to an 
afternoon, to a tree, a spot of sun on the carpet; fidelity to garments, pieces of 
furniture, to perfumes or landscapes. (The discovery he ultimately makes on the 
road to Meseglise is the highest "moral teaching" Proust has to offer: a sort of 
spatial transposition of the semper idem.) I grant that Proust, in the deepest sense, 
"perhaps ranges himself on the side of death." His cosmos has its sun, perhaps, in 
death, around which orbit the lived moments, the gathered things. "Beyond the 
pleasure principle" is probably the best commentary there is on Proust's works. 
In order to understand Proust, generally speaking, it is perhaps necessary to 
begin with the fact that his subject is the obverse side, le revers, "not so much of 
the world but of life itself." [S2,3] 

The eternity of the operetta, says Wiesengrund in his essay on this form," is the 
eternity of yesterday. [S2,4] 

"Perhaps no simulacrum has provided us with an ensemble of oh jects more pre- 
cisely attuned to the concept of 'ideal' than that great simulacrum which consti- 
tutes the revolutionary ornamental architecture of Jugendstil. No collective effort 
has succeeded in creating a dream world as pure, and as disturhing, as these 
Jugendstil buildings. Situated, as they are, on the margins of architecture, they 
alone constitute the realization of desires in which an excessively violent and cruel 
automatism painfully betrays the sort of hatred for reality and need for refuge in 
an ideal world that we find in childhood neurosis." Salvador DaK, "L'Ane 
pourri," Le Surrealisme oil service de la revolution, 1, no. 1 (Paris, 1930), p. 12. 
D Industry D Advertising D [S2,5] 

"Here is what we can still love: the imposing block of those rapturous and frigid 
structures scattered across all of Europe, scorned and neglected by anthologies 
and studies." Salvador Dali, "L'Ane pourri," Le Surrealisme au service de la involu- 
tion, 1, no. 1 (Paris, 1930), p. 12. Perhaps no city contains more perfect examples 



of thisjugendstil than Barcelona, in the works of the architect who designed the 
Church of the Sagrada Familia. 9 [S2a,l] 



Wiesengrund cites and comments on a passage from Kierkegaard's Repetition: 
"One ciimhs the stairs to the first lloor in a gas-illuminated building, opens a little 
door, and stands in the entry. To the left is a glass door leading to a room. One 
continues directly ahead into an anteroom. Beyond are two entirely identical 
rooms, identically furnished, as though one were the mirror reflection of the 
other." Apropos of this passage (Kierkegaard, <Gesammelte> Werke, vol. 3 <Jena, 
1909 > , p. 138), which he cites at greater length, Wiesengrund remarks: "The du- 
plication of the room is unfathomable, seeming to be a reflection without being so. 
Like these rooms, perhaps all semblance in history resembles itself, so long as it 
itself, obedient to nature, persists as semblance." Wiesengrund-Adorno, Kier- 
kegaard (Tubingen, 1933), p. 50. 10 D Mirror D Interior D [S2a,2] 

On the motif of the heathscapes in Kafka's Der Prozefi: in the time of hell, the new 
(the pendant) is always the eternally selfsame. [S2a,3] 

After the Commune: "England welcomed the exiles and did everything it could to 
keep them. At the exhibition of 1878, it became clear that she had risen above 
France and Paris to take the premier position in the applied arts. If the modern 
style returned to France in 1900, this is perhaps a distant consequence of the 
barbarous manner in which the Commune was repressed." Dubech and d'Espezel, 
Histoire de Paris (Paris, 1926), p. 437. [S2a,4] 

"The desire was to create a style out of thin air. Foreign infl uences favored the 
'modern style, 1 which was almost entirely inspired by floral decor. The English 
Pre-Baphaelites and the Munich urbanists provided the model. Iron construction 
was succeeded by reinforced concrete. This was the nadir for architecture, one 
which coincided with the deepest political depression. It was at this moment that 
Paris acquired those buildings and monuments which were so very strange and so 
little in accord with the older city: the building in composite style designed by 
M. Bouwens at 27 Quai d'Orsay; the subway shelters; the Samaritaine department 
store, erected by Frantz Jourdain in the middle of the historic landscape of the 
Quartier Saint-Germain rAuxerrois." Dubech and d'Espezel, Histoire de Paris, 
p. 465. [S2a,5] 

"What M. Arsene Alexandre, then, calls 'the profound charm of streamers blow- 
ing in the wind' — this serpentine effect is that of the octopus style, of green, poorly 
fired ceramics, of lines forced and stretched into tentacular ligaments, of matter 
tortured for no good reason. . . . Gourds, pumpkins, hibiscus roots, and volutes 
are the inspiration for an illogical furniture upon which appear hydrangeas, bats, 
polianthes, and peacock feathers — creations of artists in the grip of an unfortu- 
nate passion for symbols and 'poetry. 1 ... In an era of light and electricity, what 



triumphs is the aquarium, the greenish, the submarine, the hybrid, the poison- 
ous." Paul Morand, 1900 (Paris, 1931), pp. 101-103. [S2a,6] 



"This style of 1900, moreover, infects the whole of literature. Never was writing 
more pretentious. In novels, the particule is obligatory for names: there is Ma- 
dame de Scrimeuse, Madame de Girionne, Madame de Charmaille, Monsieur de 
Phocas; impossible names: Yanis, Damosa, Lord Eginard. . . . The Legendes du 
Moyen age, by Gaston Paris, which has just come out, plays to the fervent cult of 
the neo-Gothic: it offers nothing but Grails, Isoldes, Ladies of the Unicorn. Pierre 
Louys writes "le throne," with the older Latinate spelling; everywhere are found 
abysses, ymages, gyres, and the like. , . , The triumph of the y. " Paul Morand, 
1900 (Paris, 1931), pp. 179-181. [S3,l] 

"It seemed to me worthwhile to bring together, in an issue of the journal [Mino- 
taure, 3-4] containing several admirable specimens of Jugendstil art, a certain 
number of mediumistie designs .... In fact, one is immediately struck by similari- 
ties between these two modes of expression. What is Jugendstil, I am tempted to 
ask, but an attempt to generalize and to adapt mediumistie design, painting, and 
sculpture to dwellings and furniture? We find there the same discordance in the 
details; the same impossibility of repetition that guides the true, captivating 
stereotypy; the same delight in the never-ending curve (whether it he growing fern, 
or ammonite, or embryonic curl); the same profusion of minutiae, the contempla- 
tion of which seduces the eye away from pleasure in the whole. ... It could be 
maintained that these two enterprises are actually conceived tinder the same sign, 
which might well be that of the octopus: "the octopus," as Lautreamont has said, 
"with the gaze of silk." From one part to another, in terms of plastic design, down 
to the very smallest feature, it is the triumph of the equivocal; in terms of interpre- 
tation, down to the most insignificant detail, it is the triumph of the complex. Even 
the borrowing, ad nauseam, of subjects, accessory or otherwise, from the plant 
world is common to these two modes of expression (which respond, in principle, to 
quite different needs for externalization). And both of them display, to an equal 
degree, a tendency to evoke superficially . . . certain ancient artforms of Asia and 
the Americas." Andre Breton, Point du jour (Paris <1934>), pp. 234—236. 

[S3,2] 

The painted foliage on the ceilings of the Bibliothei|ue Nationale. As one leafs 
through the pages down below, it rustles up above. [S3,3] 

"Just as pieces of furniture gravitate toward one another — davenport and coat 
rack are actually the fruit of such convergence — so it seems that walls, fl oors, and 
ceilings are possessed of a peculiar power of attraction. Increasingly, furniture is 
becoming untranspor table, immovahle; it clings to walls and corners, sticks fast to 
floors, and, as it were, takes root. . . . 'Detached' works of art, like paintings that 
need to be hung or sculpture that has to be placed, are wherever possible es- 
chewed, and this tendency is very materially abetted by the revival of wall paint- 



§ ing, frescoes, decorative tapestry, and glass-painting. ... In this way, all perma- 

nent contents of the home are absorbed in exchange, while the occupant himself 
loses the power of moving about freely and becomes attached to ground and prop- 

"g erty." Dolf Sternberger, "Jugendstil," Die neue Rundschau, 45 (September 9, 

| 1934), pp. 264-266. [S3a,l] 

•3 

g "It is by means of the rich and powerful contour that . . . the figure of the soul 

becomes ornament. . . . Maeterlinck . . . praises silence (in he Tresor des humbles 

bB <The Treasure of the Humble)), that silence which does not depend on the arbi- 

trary will of two separate beings but rather wells up, so to speak, as a third being, 

O, sufficient to itself, thereafter growing to envelop the lovers and, in this way, first 

* enabling their intimacy. This veil of silence reveals itself clearly enough as a form 

of contour or as a truly animated . . . form of ornament." Dolf Sternberger, 
"Jugendstil," Die neue Rundschuu, 45 (September 9, 1934), p. 270. [S3a,2] 

"Thus, every house appears ... to be an organism which expresses its interior 
through its exterior, and van de Velde unmistakably betrays . . . the model for his 
vision of the city of characters . . .: 'To anyone who objects that this would he a 
carnival of confusion . . ., we would point to the harmonious and gladdening im- 
pression produced by a garden where terrestrial and aquatic plants are growing 
freely. ' If the city is a garden full of freely growing house-organisms, it is not clear 
where, in such a vision, man would occupy a place, unless it be that he is caught 
within the interior of this plant life, himself rooted and attached to the soil — land 
or water — and, as if by enchantment (metamorphosis), rendered incapable of 
moving otherwise than as the plant that frames and encases him should move. . . . 
It is something like the astral body which Rudolf Steiner envisioned and experi- 
enced — Rudolf Steiner, . . . whose . . . school . . . endowed so many of its works 
. . . with an ornamental solemnity, the curved signature of which is nothing other 
than a vestige of Jugendstil ornament." See the essay's epigraph from Ovid, Meta- 
morphosis, hook 3, lines 509-510: "But when they sought his body, they found 
nothing, / Only a flower with a yellow center / Surrounded with white petals."" 
Sternberger, "Jugendstil," pp. 268-269, 254. [S3a,3] 

The view of Jugendstil represented below is very problematic, for no historical 
phenomenon can be grasped exclusively under the category of flight; such flight 
is always registered concretely in terms of what is flown. "What . . . remains 
outside ... is the din of cities, the unbridled fury not of the elements but of 
industry, the all-inclusive sovereignty of the modem economics of exchange, the 
world of ongoing activity, of technologized labor, and of the masses, the world 
that appeared to the exponents of Jugendstil as a general uproar, stifling and 
chaotic." Dolf Sternberger, 'Jugendstil," Die neue Rundschau, 45 (September 9, 
1934), p. 260. [S4,l] 



"The most characteristic work of Jugendstil is the house. More precisely, the 
single-family dwelling." Sternberger, "Jugendstil," Die neue Rundschau, 45 (Sep- 
tember 9, 1934), p. 264. [S4,2] 



Delvau speaks, at one point, of the "future Benedictines who will write the history 
of Paris as it was in the nineteenth century." Alfred Delvau, Les Dessous de Paris 
(Paris, 1860), p. 32 ("Alexandre Privat d'Anglemont"). [S4,3] 



Jugendstil and socialist housing policy: "The art of the future will be more per- 
sonal than what has come before. At no other time has man's passion for self- 
knowledge been so strong as it is today, and the place where he can best fulfill and 
transform his individuality is the house, the house which each of us, according to 
his . . . heart's desire, will build. ... In each of us slumbers a gift for ornamental 
invention . . . sufficiently compelling ... to allow us to dispense with any middle- 
man in order to build our house." After citing these lines from van de Velde's 
Renaissance in modernen Kunstgeiverbe < Renaissance in the Modern Decorative 
Arts>, Karski continues: "For anyone who reads this, it must be absolutely clear 
that such an ideal is impossible in the present state of society, and that its realiza- 
tion is reserved for socialism." J. Karski, "Moderne Kunststromungen und Sozial- 
ismus," Die neue Zeit, 20, no. 1 (Stuttgart < 1901-1902 >), pp. 146-147. [S4,4] 



Among the stylistic elements that enter into Jugendstil from iron construction 
and technical design, one of the most important is the predominance of the vide 
over the plein, the empty over the full. [S4,5] 

Just as Ibsen passes judgment on Jugendstil architecture in ihe Master Builder, so 
he passes judgment on its female type in Hedda Gabler. She is the theatrical sister 
of those diseuses and dancers who, in floral depravity or innocence, appear naked 
and without objective background on Jugendstil posters. [S4,6] 

When we have to get up early on a day of departure, it can sometimes happen 
that, unwilling to tear ourselves away from sleep, we dream that we are out of 
bed and getting dressed. Such a dream was dreamed in Jugendstil by the bour- 
geoisie, fifteen years before history woke them with a bang. [S4a, 1] 

'"'That is the longing: to dwell midst the waves / and have no homeland in time." 
Rainer Maria Rilke, Diefriihen Gedichte (Leipzig, 1922), p. 1 (epigraph). 

[S4a,2] 



"The Paris Street," at the Paris world exhibition of 1900, realizes, in an extreme 
manner, the idea of the private dwelling that is characteristic of Jugendstil: "Here, 
in a long row, buildings of various kinds . . . have been erected . . . The satirical 
newspaper Le Rire has set up a Punch and Judy show. . . . The originator of the 
serpentine dance, Loie Fuller, has her theater in the row. Not far away ... a house 
that appears to be standing on its head, with its roof planted in the earth and its 
doorsills pointing skyward, and which is known as The Tower of Wonders.' . . . 
The idea, at any rate, is original." Th. Heine, "Die Strasse von Paris" in Die 
Pariser Weltausstellung in Wort und Bild, ed. Dr. Georg Malkowsky (Berlin, 1900), 
p. 78. [S4a,3] 



On the upside-down manor house: "This little house, constructed in Gothic style, 
stands . . . literally on its head; that is, its roof, with its chimneys and turrets, is 
stuck into the ground, while its foundation points to the heavens. Naturally, all the 
windows, doors, balconies, galleries, moMings, ornaments, and inscriptions are 
upside down too, and even the face of the grandfather clock obeys this ten- 
dency. ... So far, this mad idea is amusing . . . , but once you are inside, it becomes 
tiresome. There, you are . . . yourself . . . upside down, together with . . . the 
objects on view. . . . One sees a table set for lunch, a rather richly furnished salon, 
as well as a hathroom. . . . The adjoining room . . . and some others, too, are 
actually lined with concave and convex mirrors. The contractors call them quite 
simply 'laughing chambers. '" "Le Manoir a Ten vers," Die Pmriser Weltausstellung 
in Wort unci Bild, ed. Dr. Georg Malkowsky (Berlin, 1900), p. 474-475. [S4a,4] 

On the London world exhibition of 1 85 1 : "~V\fe still reside amid the aftereffects of 
what this exhibition achieved — not only in the realm of technology and machines, 
but in the realm of artistic development. . . . We ask ourselves today whether the 
movement that led to the production of monumental buildings in glass and iron 
. . . was not also heralded in the design of furniture and utensils. In 1851 this 
question could not have arisen, although there were many things that could be 
noted. In the first decades of the nineteenth century, mechanized industry in 
England had advanced to the point where furnishings and utensils were being 
stripped of superfluous ornamentation so as to be manufactured more easily 
through machines. In this way there emerged, for furniture especially, a series of 
very simple but thoroughly constructive and altogether sensible forms, in which 
we are again beginning to take an interest. The wholly modern furniture of 1900, 
which eschews all ornament and puts the accent on pure line, maintains a direct 
link to that delicately balanced and compact mahogany furniture of 1830-1850. 
But in 1850 no one appreciated what had already in fact been reached in the 
pursuit of new and fundamental forms." (People succumbed, instead, to the 
historicism that initially fostered a vogue for the Renaissance.) Julius Lessing, 
Das halbe Jahrhundert der Weltausstellungen (Berlin, 1900), p. 1 1-12. [S5,l] 

In connection with Kafka's Titorelli <Sl,4>, compare the program of the natural- 
ist painters around 1860: "According to them, the position of the artist toward 
nature ought to be . . . impersonal — so much so that he should be capable of 
painting the same picture ten times in succession, without hesitating and without 
having the later copies differ in any way from those that came before." Gisela 
Freund, La Photographic au point de vne sociologique (manuscript, p. 128). [S5,2] 

Perhaps an attempt should be made to extend the scope of this inquiry up to the 
threshold of the war, by tracing the influence of Jugendstil on the youth move- 
ment. 12 [S5,3] 



The facade of the "Information" Building on the Rue Reaumur is an example of 
Jugendstil in which the ornamental modification of supporting structures is seen 
particularly clearly. [S5,4] 



Influence of the processes of technological reproduction on the realists' theory of 
painting: "According to them, the position of the artist toward nature ought to be 
completely impersonal — so much so that he should be capable of painting the 
same picture ten times in succession, without hesitating and without having the 
later copies differ in any way from those that came before." Gisele Freund, La 
Photogrmphie en France au XIX siecle (Paris, 1936), p. 106. [S5,5] 

Careful attention should be given to the relation of Jugendstil to Symbolism, 
which brings out its esoteric side. Therive writes, in his review of Edouard 
Dujardin, Mallarrne par un des siens (Paris, 1936) : "In an astute preface to a book 
by Edouard Dujardin, Jean Cassou explains that le symbolisme was a mystical, 
magical enterprise, and that it posed the eternal problem of jargon — 'argot essen- 
tialized, which signifies, on the part of the artistic caste, the will to absence and 
escape.' . . . What Symbolism liked best was the semiparodic play with dreams, 
with ambiguous forms; and this commentator goes so far as to say that the 
melange of aestheticism and bad taste of the sort popularized by Le Chat Noir 
(caf' cone', for at/e concert; leg-o'-mutton sleeves; orchids; and hairstyles inspired 
by wrought-iron designs) was a necessary and exquisite combination." Andre 
Therive, "Les Livres" (Le Temps, June 25, 1936). [S5a,l] 

Dernier labored four years on a portrait that hangs in the Louvre, and along the 
way he did not scorn the use of a magnifying glass to obtain a reproduction 
perfectly faithful to nature. This at a time when photography had already been 
invented. <?> So difficult is it for man to relinquish his place and allow the 
apparatus to take over for him. (See Gisele Freund, La Photographie en France au 
XIX siecle [Paris, 1936], p. 112.) * [S5 a ,2] 

In a prefiguration of Jugendstil, Baudelaire sketches "a room that is like a dream, 
a truly spiritual room. . . . Every piece of furniture is of an elongated form, 
languid and prostrate, and seems to be dreaming — endowed, one would say, with 
a sonmambular existence, like minerals and plants." In this text, he conjures an 
idol that might well call to mind the "unnatural mothers" of Segantini or Ibsen's 
Hedda Gabler: "the Idol . . . Yes, those are her eyes . . . those subtle and terrible 
eyes that I recognize by their dread mockery." Charles Baudelaire, Le Spleen de 
Paris, ed. R. Simon (Paris), p. 5 ("La Chambre double"). 13 [S5 a ,3] 

In the book The Nightside of Paris, by Edmund B. d'Auvergne (London, n.d., 
circa 1910), there is a mention, on page 56, of the old Chat Noir cafe (Rue Yictor- 
Masse), where, over the door, there was an inscription that read: "Passerhy, he 
modern!" (In a letter from Wiesengrund.) — Rollinat at Le Chat Noir. <See 
J55a,7.> [S5 a ,4] 

"What could be further from us than the amazing ambition of a Leonardo, who, 
considering painting as a supreme end, a supreme display of knowledge, and 
deciding that it called for omniscience, did not hesitate to embark on a universal 
analysis whose depth and precision leave us overwhelmed? The passage from the 



ancient grandeur of painting to its present condition is quite perceptible in the 
artworks and writings of Eugene Delacroix. This modern, full of ideas, is tortured 
with restlessness and a sense of impotence; at each instant he encounters the limits 
of his resources in his efforts to equal the masters of the past. Nothing could better 
illustrate the diminution of that indefinable force and fullness of earlier days than 
the spectacle of that very noble artist, divided against himself, embarking nerv- 
ously on a last struggle to attain the grand style in art." Paul Valery, Pieces sur 
Vart (Paris), pp. 191-192 ("Antonr de Corot"). 14 [S6,l] 



"The victories of art seem bought by the loss of character." Karl Marx, "Die 
Revolutionen von 1848 und das Proletariat," speech to mark the fourth anniver- 
sary of the foundation of the <Chartist> Peoples Paper; published in The Peoples 
Paper, April 19, 1856. [In Karl Marx als Denker, Mensch und Revolutioniir, ed. 
D. Rjazanov (Vienna, Berlin <1928>), p. 42. ] ,s [S6,2] 

Dolf Sternberger's essay "Hohe See und Schiffbruch" <High Seas and Shipwreclo 
is concerned with the "transformations of an allegory." "It is from allegory that 
genre is born. Shipwreck as allegory signifies . . . the ephemerality of the world in 
general; shipwreck as genre is a peephole looking out on a world beyond ours, on a 
dangerous life that is not our life but is nevertheless necessary. . . . This heroic 
genre remains the sign under which the reorganization and reconciliation of soci- 
ety . . . begins," as he writes in another passage with reference to Spielhagen's 
Stunnflut <The Breaking of the Storm> (1877). Die neue Rundschau, 46 (August 
8, 1935), pp. 196, 199. [S6,3] 

"Private comfort was virtually unknown among the Greeks. These citizens of 
small towns, who raised in their midst so many admirable public monuments, 
resided in houses that were more than modest, houses in which vases (though 
masterpieces of elegance, to be sure) constituted the only furnishings. Ernest 
Renan, Essais de morale et de critique (Paris, 1859), p. 359 ("La Poesie a 1'Exposi- 
tion"). To be compared with this is the character of the rooms in the Goethe 
House. — Note die quite opposite love of comfort in Baudelaire's production. 

[S6,4] 

"Far from saying that the progress of art is parallel to that made by a nation in the 
taste for 'comfort' (I am forced to use this barbarous word to express an idea quite 
un-French), we can unequivocally state, on the contrary, that the epochs and the 
countries in which comfort became the public's principal attraction have had the 
least talent for art. . . . Convenience excludes style; a pot from an English factory 
is better adapted to its end than all the vases of Vulci or Nola. These latter are 
works of art, whereas the English pot will never be anything but a household 
utensil. . . . The incontestable conclusion is that nowhere in history is the progress 
of industry in any way parallel to the progress of art." Ernest Renan, Essais de 
moral et de critique (Paris, 1859), pp. 359, 361, 363 ("La Poesie de l'Exposition"). 

[S6a,l] 



"The rapid overpopulation of the capital had the effect ... of reducing the surface 
area in rooms. Already in his 'Salon de 1828,' Stendhal wrote: 'Eight days ago, I 
went to look for an apartment on the Rue Godot-de-Mauroy. I was struck by the 
smallness of the rooms. The century of painting is over, I said to myself with a sigh; 
only engraving can prosper.'" Amedee Ozenfant, " La Peinture murale," (in Ency- 
clopedic franqaise, vol. 16, Arts et litteratures dans la societe content poraine, 1 
<Paris, 1935 >, p. 70). [S6a,2] 

Baudelaire in his review of Madame Bovary: "Realism — a repulsive insult flung in 
the face of every analytic writer, a vague and elastic word which for the ordinary 
man signifies not a new means of creation, hut a minute description of trivial 
details." Baudelaire, L'Art romantique, p. 413. 16 [S6a,3] 

In Chapter 24, "Beaux-Arts," of the Argument du livre sur la Belgique: "Special- 
ists. — One painter for sunshine, one for snow, one for moonlight, one for furni- 
ture, one for fabrics, one for flowers — and subdivision of specialties ad 
infinitum. — Collaboration a necessity, as in industry." Baudelaire, Oeuvres, vol. 
2, cd. Y.-G. Le Dantec <Paris, 1932>, p. 718. [S6a,4] 

"The elevation of urban life to the level of myth signifies right away, for the more 
clearheaded, a keen predisposition of modernity. The position which tliis latter 
concept occupies in Baudelaire is well known. . . . For lrim, as he says, it is a 
'principal and essential problem,' a question of knowing whether or not his age 
possesses 'a specific beauty inherent in our new passions.' We know bis answer: it 
is the conclusion of that essay which, at least in its range, remains the most consid- 
erable of his theoretic writings: "The marvelous envelops and permeates us, like 
the atmosphere itself; hut we do not see it. . . . For the heroes of the Iliad cannot 
compare with you, 0 Vautrin, 0 Rastignac, 0 Birotteau — nor with you, 0 Fon- 
tanares, who dared not publicly recount your sorrows wearing the funereal and 
rumpled frock coat of today; nor with you, 0 Honore de Balzac, you the most 
heroic, the most amazing, the most romantic, and the most poetic of all the charac- 
ters that you have drawn from your fertile bosom' (Baudelaire, 'Salon de 1846,' 
section 18)."" Roger CaiJlois, "Paris, mythe moderne, Nouvelle Revue franqaise, 
25, no. 284 (May 1, 1937), pp. 690-691. [S7,l] 

In Chapter 24, "Beaux-Arts," of the Argument du livre sur la Belgique: "A few 
pages on that infamous poseur named Wiertz, a favorite of English cockneys." 
Baudelaire, Oeuvres, vol. 2, ed. Y.-G. Le Dantec <Paris, 1932> , p. 718. And page 
720: "Independent painting. — Wiertz. Charlatan. Idiot. Thief. . . . Wiertz, the 
philosopher-painter and litterateur. Modern moonshine. The Christ of humani- 
tarians. . . . Inanity comparable to that of Victor Hugo at the end of Les Contem- 
plations. Aholition of death's sting, infinite power of humanity. / Inscriptions on 
walls. Grave offenses against France and French critics. Wiertz's maxims, ahove 
all. . . . Brussels the capital of the world. Paris a province. Wiertz's books. Plagia- 
risms. He doesn't know how to draw, and his stupidity is as massive as his giants. 



This phony, in sum, knows how to manage his affairs. But what will Brussels do 
with aJl this after his death? / Trompe-l'oeil. The bellows camera. Napoleon in 
hell. The book of Waterloo. Wiertz and Victor Hugo are out to save the world." 



Ingres, in his Reponse au rapport sur I'Ecole des Beaux-Arts (Paris, 1863), makes the 
bluntest possible defense of the institutions of the school before the Minister of 
Fine Arts, to whom the communication is directed. In this, he does not take sides 
against Romanticism. His response has to do, from the beginning (p. 4), with 
industry: "Now people want to marry industry to art. Industry! We want none of 
it! Let it keep to its place and not come plant itself on the steps of our 
school . . . !" — Ingres insists on making drawing the sole basis of instruction in 
painting. One can learn the use of colors in eight days. [S7a,l] 

Daniel Halevy remembers seeing Italian models in his childhood — women dressed 
in the costume of Sorrento with a tambourine in their hands, who used to stand 
chatting at the fountain in the Place Pigalle. See Halevy, Pays parisiens < Paris, 



The life of flowers injugendstil: from the flowers of evil extends an arc, over the 
flower-souls of Odilon Redon, to the orchids which Proust weaves into the eroti- 



Segantini's "unnatural mothers," as a motif of Jugendstil, closely related to Les 
Lesbiennes <seeJ19,4>. The depraved woman stays clear of fertility, as the priest 
stays clear of it. Jugendstil, in fact, describes two distinct lines. That of perversion 
leads from Baudelaire to Wilde and Beardsley; the hieratic line leads through 
Mallaime to George. In the end, a third line stands out more vigorously, the only 
one that here and there emerges from the realm of art. This is the line of emanci- 
pation, which, taking its departure from Les Fleurs du mal, conjoins the under- 
world that produces the Tagebuch einer Verlorenen ls with the heights of Zara- 
thustra. (This, presumably, the point of the remark made by Capus.) [S7a,4] 

Motif of infertility: Ibsen's women characters don't sleep with their men; they go 
"hand in hand" with them to encounter something terrible. [S7a,5] 

The perverse flower-glance of Odilon Redon. [S7a,6] 

Formulas of emancipation in Ibsen: the ideal challenge; dying in beauty; homes 
for human beings <see I4,4>; one's own responsibility {The Lady from the Sea). 



[S7.2] 



1932 >, p. 60. 



[S7a,2] 



cism of his Swann. 



[S7a,3] 



[S8.1] 



Jugendstil is the stylizing style par excellence. 



[S8.2] 



The idea of eternal return in £aratkustra is, according to its true nature, a styliza- $ 

tion of the worldview that in Blanqui still displays its infernal traits. It is a ^ 

stylization of existence down to the tiniest fractions of its temporal process. „ 

Nevertheless: Zarathustra's style disavows itself in the doctrine that is ex- 13 

pounded through it. [S8,3] 1' 

I' 

The three defining "motifs" ofjugendstil: the hieratic motif, the motif of perver- 05 

sion, the motif of emancipation. They all have their place in Les Flenrs du tnal; to cL 

each of them one can assign a representative poem from the collection. To the J* 5 

first, "Benediction"; to the second, "Delphine et Hippolyte"; to the third, "Les jf" 

Litanies de Satan." [S8,4] a. 



Zarathustra has, first of all, appropriated to himself the tectonic elements of 
Jugendstil, in contrast to its organic motifs. The pauses especially, which are 
characteristic of his rhytlnnics, are an exact counterpart to the tectonic phenome- 
non so basic to this style — namely, the predominance of the hollow form over the 
filled form. [S8,5] 



Certain themes ofjugendstil are derived from technological forms. Thus the 
profiles of iron supports that appear as ornamental motifs on facades. See the 
essay [by Martin?] in the Frankfurter ^eihing, circa 1926-1929. [S8,6] 



"Benediction" : "So thoroughly will I twist this miserable tree / that it will never 
put forth its evil-smelling buds!" 1 * The plant motif ofjugendstil, and its line, 
appear here — and certainly not in a passage more ready to hand. [S8,7] 



Jugendstil forces the auratic. Never has the sun worn a more glorious aureole; 
never was the eye of man more radiant than with Fidus. Maeterlinck pushes the 
unfolding of the auratic to the point of absurdity. The silence of the characters in 
his plays is one of its manifestations. Baudelaire's "Perte d'aureole" 2 " stands in the 
most decided opposition to this Jugendstil motif. [S8,8] 



Jugendstil is the second attempt on the part of art to come to terms with technol- 
ogy. The first attempt was realism. There the problem was more or less present in 
the consciousness of the artists, who were uneasy about the new processes of 
technological reproduction. (The theory of realism demonstrates this; see S5,5.) 
In Jugendstil, the problem as such was already prey to repression. Jugendstil no 
longer saw itself threatened by the competing technology. And so the confronta- 
tion with technology that lies hidden within it was all the more aggressive. Its 
recourse to technological motifs arises from the effort to sterilize them ornamen- 
tally. (It was tliis, we may say in passing, that gave Adolf Loos's struggle against 
ornament its salient political significance.) [S8a,l] 



The fundamental motif ofjugendstil is the transfiguration of infertility. The body 
is portrayed, preferably, in the forms that precede sexual maturity. [S8a,2] 



Lesbian love carries spiritualization forward into the very womb of the woman. 
There it raises its lily-banner of "pure love," which knows no pregnancy and no 
family. [S8a,3] 

The consciousness of someone prone to spleen furnishes a miniature model of 
the world spirit to which the idea of eternal recurrence would have to be as- 
cribed. [S8a,4] 

"There, man passes through forests of symbols / Which observe him with famil- 
iar eyes." "Correspondances." 21 It is the flower-gazes ofjugendstil that emerge 
here. Jugendstil wins back symbols. The word "symbol" is not often found in 
Baudelaire. [S8a,5] 

The development that led Maeterlinck, in the course of a long life, to an ex- 
tremely reactionary position is logical. [S8a,6] 

The reactionary attempt to sever technologically constituted forms from their 
functional contexts and turn them into natural constants — that is, to stylize 
them — appears, in a mode similar to Jugendstil, somewhat later in Futurism. 

[S8a,7] 

The sense of sorrow which autumn awakens in Baudelaire. It is the season of 
harvest, the time when the flowers are undone. Autumn is invoked in Baudelaire 
with particular solemnity. To it are consecrated the words that are perhaps the 
most mournful in all his poetry. Of the sun, it is said: "He bids the crops to grow 
and ripen / in the immortal heart that would always flower." 22 In the figure of the 
heart that would bear no fruit, Baudelaire has already passed judgment on 
Jugendstil, long before its appearance on the scene. [S9,l] 

"This seeking for my home . . . was my affliction. . . . Where is — my home? I ask 
and seek and have sought for it; I have not found it. Oh, eternal Everywhere; oh, 
eternal Nowhere." Citation from Zarathustra, in Karl Lowith, Nietzsches Phi- 
losophic der ewigen Wiederkunft < Berlin, 1935 >, p. 35 [compare the Rilke epi- 
graph, S4a,2], ed. Kroner, p. 398. 2 ! [S9,2] 

It may be supposed that in the typical Jugendstil line — conjoined in fantastic 
montage — nerve and electrical wire not infrequently meet (and that the vegetal 
nervous system in particular operates, as a limiting form, to mediate between the 
world of organism and the world of technology) . "The fm-de-siecle cult of the 
nerves . . . maintains this telegraphic image of exchange. It was said of Strindberg 
by his second wife, Frida, . . . that his nerves had become so sensitive to atmo- 
spheric electricity that an approaching thunderstorm would send its signal over 



them as if over electrical wires." Dolf Sternberger, Panorama (Hamburg, 1938), 
p. 33. [S9,3] 



Injugendstil, the bourgeoisie begins to come to terms with the conditions — not 
yet, to be sure, of its social dominion — but of its dominion over nature. Insight 
into these conditions engenders a strain at the threshold of its consciousness. 
Hence the mysticism (Maeterlinck) which seeks to deflect this pressure; but 
hence also the reception of technological forms injugendstil — for example, of 
hollow space. [S9,4] 

TTie chapter in £arathastra entitled "Unter Tochtem der Wiiste" < Among the 
Daughters of the Desert> is instructive, not only for the fact that the flower 
maidens — an important Jugendstil motif — make an appearance here in 
Nietzsche, but also in view of Nietzsche's kinship with Guys. The phrase "deep 
but without thoughts" 2 1 perfectly captures the expression worn by the prostitutes 
in Guys. [S9a,l] 

The extreme point in the technological organization of the world is the liquida- 
tion of fertility. The frigid woman embodies the ideal of beauty injugendstil. 
(Jugendstil sees in every woman not Helena but Olympia.) [S9a,2] 

Individual, group, mass — the group is the principle of genre. For Jugendstil, the 
isolation of the individual is typical (see Ibsen). [S9a,3] 

Jugendstil represents an advance, insofar as the bourgeoisie gains access to the 
technological bases of its control over nature; a regression, insofar as it loses the 
power of looking the everyday in the face. (That can still be done only within the 
security of the saving lie.) 25 — The bourgeoisie senses that its days are numbered; 
all the more it wishes to stay young. Thus, it deludes itself with the prospect of a 
longer life or, at the least, a death in beauty. [S9a,4] 



Segantini and Munch; Margarete Bohme and Przybyszewski. [S9a,5] 

Vaihinger's philosophy of the "as if" is Jugendstil's little death knell, sounding for 
those condemned. [S9a,6] 



"With the early works of Hennebique and the Perret brothers, a new chapter 
opens in the history of architecture. The desire for escape and renewal, it should 
he added, had been seen in the efforts of the Jugendstil school, which failed miser- 
ably. These architects, it seemed, would torture stone to the point of exhaustion, 
and they thus prepared the way for a fierce reaction in favor of simplicity. Archi- 
tectural art was to he reborn in serene forms through the utilization of new materi- 
als." Marcel Zahar, "Les Tendances actuelles de 1' architecture," Encyclopedic 
francaise, vol. 17, p. 17). [S9a,7] 



In his "Salons," Baudelaire has given himself out as an implacable foe of genre. 
Baudelaire stands at the beginning of that "modern style" which represents an 
attempt to liquidate genre. In Les Flairs du mal, this Jugendstil emerges for the 
first time with its characteristic floral motif. [S10,1] 

The following passage from Valery [Oeuvres completes, J, cited by Therive, Le 
lemps, April 20, 1939) reads like a reply to Baudelaire: "Modern man is a slave to 
modernity. . . . We will soon have to build heavily insulated cloisters. . . . Speed, 
numbers, effects of surprise, contrast, repetition, size, novelty, and credulity will 
be despised there." 2 " [S10.2] 

Concerning sensation: this pattern — novelty and the depreciation that befalls it, 
with a shock — has found a peculiarly drastic expression since the middle of the 
nineteenth century. The worn coin loses nothing of its value; the postmarked 
stamp is devalued. It is probably the first sort of voucher whose validity is 
inseparable from its character of newness. (The registration of value goes to- 
gether here with its cancellation.) [S10.3] 

On the motif of sterility in Jugendstil: procreation was felt to be the least worthy 
manner of subscribing to the animal side of creation. [S 10,4] 

The "no" to be grasped as the antithesis of what goes "according to plan." On the 
subject of planning, compare Scheerbart's Lesabendio: we are all so weary because 
we have no plan. [S10,5] 

"Novelty. The cult of novelty. The new is one of those poisonous stimulants which 
end up becoming more necessary than any food; drugs which, once they get a hold 
on us, need to be taken in progressively larger doses until they are fatal, though 
we'd die without them. It is a curious habit — growing thus attached to that perish- 
able part of things in which precisely their novelty consists." Paul Valery, Choses 
tu.es < Paris, 1930> , pp. 14-15. 27 [S10.6] 

Decisive passage in Proust concerning the aura. He speaks of his journey to 
Balbec and comments that it would probably be made today in an automobile, 
which, moreover, would have its advantages. "But, after all, the special attraction 
of the journey lies not in our being able to alight at places on the way . . . , but in 
its making the difference between departure and arrival not as imperceptible but 
as intense as possible, so that we are conscious of it . . . intact, as it existed in our 
mind when imagination bore us from the place in which we were living right to 
the very heart of a place we longed to see, in a single sweep which seemed 
miraculous to us not so much because it covered a certain distance as because it 
united two distinct individualities of the world, took us from one name to an- 
other name; and this difference is accentuated (more than in a form of locomo- 
tion in which, since one can stop and alight where one chooses, there can scarcely 
be said to be any point of arrival) by the mysterious operation that is performed 



in those peculiar places, railway stations, which do not constitute, so to speak, a oJ 
part of the surrounding town but contain the essence of its personality, just as 

upon their signboards they bear its painted name. . . . Unhappily diose marvel- ^ 

ous places which are railway stations, from which one sets out for a remote ^ 

destination, are tragic places also, for . . . we must lay aside all hope of going B 

home to sleep in our own bed, once we have made up our mind to penetrate into cp 

the pestiferous cavern through which we may have access to the mystery, into ^ 

one of those vast, glass-roofed sheds, like that of Saint-Lazare, into which I must 2 

go to find the train for Balbec, and which extended over the rent bowels of the £. 

city one of those bleak and boundless skies, heavy with an accumulation of ^ 

dramatic menaces, like certain skies painted with an almost Parisian modernity ^ 

by Mantegna or Veronese, beneath which could be accomplished only some "3 
solemn and tremendous act, such as a departure by train or the Elevation of the 
Cross." Marcel Proust, A I'Ombre des jeunes Jilles en Jieurs (Paris), vol. 2, pp. 62- 
63. 2 » [SlOa] 

Proust on the museum: "But in this respect, as in every other, our age is infected 
with a mania for showing things only in the environment that properly belongs to 
them, thereby suppressing the essential thing: the act of mind which isolated them 
from that environment. A picture is nowadays 'presented' in the midst of furni- 
ture, ornaments, hangings of the same period, a secondhand scheme of decora- 
tion . . . ; and among these, the masterpiece at which we glance up from the table 
while we dine does not give us that exhdarating delight which we can expect from it 
only in a public galJery, which symbolizes far better by its bareness, by the ahsence 
of all irritating detail, those innermost spaces into which the artist withdrew to 
create it." Marcel Proust, A VOmbre des jeunes filles en Jieurs (Paris), vol. 2, 
pp. 62-63. 29 [SI 1,1] 

How does modernism become Jugendstil? [Sll,2] 

Battlefield or hazaar? "In former times, we may recall, there was, in literature, a 
movement of generous and disinterested activity. There were schools and leaders 
of schools, parties and leaders of parties, systems comhating other systems, intel- 
lectual currents and countercurrents . . . — a passionate, militant literary life. . . . 
Ah yes, around 1830, I should say, all the men of letters used to glory in being 
soldiers on an expedition, and what they required of puhlicity they got, in the 
shadow of some banner or other, from the proud summons to the field of bat- 
tle. . . . What remains to us today of all this hrave show? Our forefathers fought 
the good fight, and we — we manufacture and sell Amid the confusion of the pre- 
sent, what is most clear to me is that in place of the battlefield have come myriad 
shops and workshops, where each day sees the production and vending of the 
newest fashions and what, in general, is known as the Paris article.'''' "Yes, modiste 
is the word for our generation of thinkers and dreamers." Hippolyte Babon, Les 
Payens innocents (Paris, 1858), pp. vii-viii ("Lettre a Charles Asselineau"). 

[S11.3] 