[Modes of Lighting] 



Et noctumis facibus illustrata. 1 

— Medal of 1667, commemorating the introduction 
of street lighting 



"Napoleon has coverings of wool, velvet, silk, embroidery, gold, and silver; a glass 
ball for his hat; wreaths of the immortals; and an eternal gas lamp." Karl Gutz- 
kow, Briefe aus Paris (Leipzig, 1842), vol. 1, p. 270. <See "The Ring of Saturn. "> 

[Tl.l] 

Note relating to 1824: "Paris was illuminated, this year, by means of 11,205 street 
lamps. . . . The entrepreneur has been hired to provide lighting for the entire city 
for at least forty minutes — that is to say, beginning twenty minutes before the hour 
prescribed daily, and finishing twenty minutes later; he can assign no more than 
twenty-five lamps to each lamplighter." J. -A. Dulaure, Histoire < physique, civile 
et morale> de Paris depuis 1821 jusqua nos jours (Paris <1835>), vol. 2, pp. 118- 
119. [T1.2] 

"A dreamlike setting, where the yellowish flickering of the gas is wedded to the 
lunar frigidity of electric light." Georges Montorgueil, Paris au hasard (Paris, 
1895), p. 65. [n,3] 

1857, the first electric streetlights (at the Louvre). [Tl,4] 

Originally gas was delivered to fashionable establishments in containers for daily 
consumption. [Tl,5] 

"I boldly declare myself the friend of Argand lamps; these, to tell the truth, are 
content with shedding light and do not dazzle the eyes. Much less volatile than gas, 
their oil never causes explosions; with them we breathe more freely, and the odor 
is less offensive. Truly incomprehensible to me is the existence of all those shop- 
keepers who, entrenched in our arcades, remain — at all hours and in the warmest 
of weathers — within shops where, on account of the gas, it feels like the Tropics." 
0 Arcades □ Nouveaux tableaux de Paris, ou Observations sur les moeurs et us- 
ages des Parisiens au commencement du XIX'' siecle (Paris, 1828), vol. 1, p. 39. 

[Tl,6] 



"During this same period, the amount of street lighting more than doubled. Gas 
was now used instead of oil. New street lamps took the place of the older appara- 
tus, and permanent lighting was substituted for intermittent lighting." M. Pocte, 
E. Clouzot, G. Henriot, La Transformation de Paris sous le Second Empire, 
< Paris, 1910 >, p. 65 (Exposition de la Bibliotheque et des Travaux historiques de 
la ville de Paris). [Tl,7] 

On the ladies of the cash register: "All day long they go about in hair curlers and 
dressing gown; after sundown, however, when the gas is lit, they make their ap- 
pearance, arrayed as for a ball. Seeing them, then, enthroned at the cashier's 
desk, surrounded by a sea of light, one may well think back to The Blue Library 2 
and the fairy tale of the prince with golden hair and the enchanting princess, a 
comparison the more admissible inasmuch as Parisian women enchant more than 
they are enchanted." Eduard Kroloff, Schilderungenaus Paris (Hamburg, 1839), 
vol. 2, pp. 76-77. [Tl,8] 

The tin racks with artificial flowers, which can be found at refreshment bars in 
railroad stations, and elsewhere, are vestiges of the floral arrangements that 
formerly encircled the cashier. [Tl,9] 

Du Bartas called the sun "Grand Duke of Candles." Cited by M. Du Camp, Paris 
(Paris, 1875), vol. 5, p. 268. [T1.10] 

"The lantern carriers will have oil lanterns with 'six thick wicks'; they will be 
stationed at posts, each one separated from the next by a distance of eight hundred 
paces. . . . They will have a tinted lamp hung above their post that will serve as a 
beacon, and on their belts an hour glass of a quarter hour's duration, bearing the 
shield of the city. . . . Here, once again, it was a matter of empiricism; these wan- 
dering lamps provided no security at all to the city, and the carriers beat up the 
people they were accompanying on more than one occasion. Lacking anything 
better, however, the city used them; and they were used so long that they were still 
to be found at the beginning of the nineteenth century." Du Camp, Paris, vol. 5, 
p. 275. [Tl,ll] 

"They [the lantern carriers] would hail hackney cabs, would serve as crier- 
escorts for chauffeured carriages, and would accompany late-night passersby 
right to their homes, coming up to their apartments and lighting the candles. Some 
claim that these lantern carriers voluntarily gave accounts every morning to the 
lieutenant general of police on what they had noticed during the night." Du Camp, 
Paris, vol. 5, p. 281. [Tla,l] 



"The patent of importation taken out by Winsor for Paris is dated December 1, 
1815; in January 1817, the Passage des Panoramas was illuminated. . . . The first 
attempts by businesses were not at all satisfactory; the public seemed resistant to 



this kind of lighting, which was suspected of being dangerous and of polluting 
breathable air." Du Camp, Paris, vol. 5, p. 290. [Tla,2] 



"This place visited by commercial death, under this gas . . . which seems to trem- 
ble at the thought of not being paid for." Louis VeuiJlot, Les Odeurs de Paris 
(Paris, 1914), p. 182. [Tla,3] 

"Glass is destined to play an important role in metal-architecture. In place of thick 
walls whose solidity and resistance is diminished by a large number of apertures, 
our houses will he so filled with openings that they will appear diaphanous. These 
wide openings, furnished with thick glass, single- or double-paned, frosted or 
transparent, will transmit — to the inside during the day and to the outside at 
night — a magical radiance." Gobard, "L'Architecture de 1'avenir," Revue 
generate d' architecture (1849), p. 30 [S. Giedion, Bauen in Frankreich <Leipzig 
and Berlin, 1928 >, p. 18]. [Tla,4] 

Lamps in the form of vases. The rare flower "light," as done in oil. (The form on a 
fashionable copper engraving of 1866.) [Tla,5] 

The old gas torches that burned in the open air often had a flame in the shape of a 
butterfly, and were known accordingly as papillons. [Tla,6] 

In the Carcel lamp, a clockwork drives the oil up into the burner; whereas in the 
Argand lamp ( quinquet ), the oil drips into the burner from a reservoir above it, 
thereby producing a shadow. [Tla,7] 

Arcades — they radiated through the Paris of the Empire like fairy grottoes. For 
someone entering the Passage des Panoramas in 1817, the sirens of gaslight 
would be singing to him on one side, while oil-lamp odalisques offered entice- 
ments from the other. With the kindling of electric lights, the irreproachable glow 
was extinguished in these galleries, which suddenly became more difficult to 
find — which wrought a black magic at entranceways, and which looked within 
themselves out of blind windows. [Tla,8] 

When, on February 12, 1790, the Marquis de Favras was executed for plotting 
against the Revolution, the Place de Greve and the scaffold were adorned with 
Chinese lanterns. [Tla,9] 

"We said, in the first volume, that every historical period is bathed in a distinctive 
light, whether diurnal or nocturnal. Now, for the first time, this world has an 
artificial illumination in the form of gaslight, which burst onto the scene in London 
at a time when Napoleon's star was beginning to decline, which entered Paris more 
or less contemporaneously with the Bourbons, and which, by slow and tenacious 
advances, finally took possession of all streets and public localities. By 1840 it was 
flaring everywhere, even in Vienna. In this strident and gloomy, sharp and Dicker- 



ing, prosaic and ghostly illumination, large insects are busily moving about: shop- 
keepers." Egon Friedell, Kulturgeschichte der Neuzeit, vol. 3 (Munich, 1931), 
p. 86. [Tla.10] 



On the Cafe Mille et Une Nuits: "Everything there was of an unprecedented mag- 
nificence. In order to give you a sense of it, it will suffice to say that the beautiful 
limonadiere had, for her seat at the counter, ... a throne, a veritable royal 
throne, on which one of the great potentates of Europe had sat in all his majesty. 
How did this throne get to be there? We could not say; we affirm the fact without 
undertaking to explain it." Histoire des cafes de Paris, extraite des memoires d'un 
viveur (Paris, 1857), p. 31. [Tla,ll] 

"Gas has replaced oil, gold has dethroned woodwork, billiards has put a stop to 
dominoes and backgammon. Where one formerly heard only the buzzing of flies, 
one now listens to the melodies of Verdi or Aubert." Histoire des cafes de Paris, 
extraite des memoires d'un viveur (Paris, 1857), p. 114. [T2,l] 

Grand Cafe du XIX'' Siecle — opens 1857 on the Boulevard de Strashourg. "The 
green felt tops of numerous billiard tables can be seen there; a splendid counter is 
illuminated by gas jets. Directly opposite is a white marble fountain, on which the 
allegorical subject is crowned hy a luminous aureole." Histoire des cafes de Paris, 
extraite des memoires d'un viveur (Paris, 1857), p. 111. [T2,2] 

"As early as 1801, Lebon had attempted to install gas lighting at the Hotel 
Seignelay, 47 Rue Saint-Dominique. The system was improved at the beginning of 
January 1808: three hundred gas jets lit up the Hospital of Saint-Louis, with such 
success that three gas-jet factories were huilt." Lucien Dubech and Pierre 
d'Espezel, Histoire de Paris (Paris, 1926), p. 335. [T2,3] 

"In matters of municipal administration, the two great works of the Restoration 
were gas lighting and the creation of omnibuses. Paris was illuminated in 1814 by 
5,000 street lamps, serviced by 142 lamplighters. In 1822, the government decided 
that streets would be lit by gas in proportion as the old contracts came due. On 
June 3, 1825, the Compagnie du Gaz Portatif Francais undertook, for the first 
time, to light up a square: the Place Vendome received four multiple-jet street 
lamps at the corners of the column and two street lamps at the corners of the Rue 
de Castiglione. In 1826, there were 9,000 gas burners in Paris; in 1828, there were 
10,000, with 1,500 subscribers, three gas companies, and four gas-jet factories, 
one of which was on the Left Bank." Dubech and d'Espezel, Histoire de Paris, 
p. 358. [T2,4] 

From an eighteenth-century prospectus, "Lighting Project, Proposed by Sid:>- 
scription for Decorating the Famous Thoroughfare of the Boulevard Saint- 
Antoine": "The Boulevard will be illuminated by a garland of Lanterns that will 
extend on both sides between the trees. This illumination will take place twice 



weekly, on Thursdays and Sundays, and, when there is a Moon, on the days after 
the abovementioned weekdays. Lighting will begin at ten o'clock, and all will be 
illuminated by eleven. . . . Since this sort of evening Promenade is suited only to 
Lords and Men of Wealth who have carriages, it is only to them that we offer this 
subscription. Subscription for this year is at the rate of 18 pounds for each House; 
in subsequent years, however, it will cost only 12 pounds, the 6 additional pounds 
this year being for the initial expenses of installation" (p. 3). "The Cafes and 
Theaters that border this famous promenade are justly celebrated; Yes — I say this 
to their glory — it was the handsome Lanterns adorning their illustrious Booths 
that gave me the idea of universal Illumination. The celebrated Chevalier Servan- 
doni has promised me designs for the Arcades, for the Garlands, and for the 
elegant Monograms, designs worthy of his fecund genius. Is there a single one of 
our wealthy style-setters who does not heartily support this brilliant Project? 
Adorned in this manner, the Boulevard will become a well-appointed Ballroom, 
one in which Carriages will serve as Box Seats." [T2,5] 

"After the theater I went to a cafe, which was all newly decorated in Renaissance 
style. The walls of the main room were entirely covered by mirrors set between 
gilded columns. The cashier sits at all times behind a large and sumptuous table 
placed upon a platform; before her is silverware, fruits, flowers, sugar, and the 
box for the garqons. It is customary for every paying customer to leave a small 
gratuity for the waiter; this is thrown by the latter into the box. Its contents are 
later equally divided." Eduard Devrient, Briefe aus Paris (Berlin, 1840), p. 20. 

[T2a,l] 

Between the February Revolution and the June Insurrection: "When the club 
meetings were over, workers took to the streets, and the sleeping bourgeois were 
either awakened by cries of 'Des lampions! Des lampions!' in consequence of 
which they would have to light their windows; or else wanton gunshots roused 
them from their beds in terror. . . . There were endless torchlight processions 
through the streets of Paris, and on one occasion it happened that a girl allowed 
herself to be undressed and shown naked to the crowd by torchlight; for the 
crowd, this was merely a reminiscence of the Goddess of Liberty of the fi rst French 
Revolution. ... At one point the prefect of police, Caussidiere, issued a proclama- 
tion against these torchlight processions — but the edict terrified the citizenry of 
Paris still more, because it stated that the people were supposed to brandish 
torches only in the event of some threat to the republic." Sigmund Englander, 
Geschichte der franzosischen Arbeiter-Associationen (Hamburg, 1864), vol. 2, 
p. 277-278. [T2a,2] 

"It was still the women who cleaned the oily street lamps by day, and lit them at 
night, climbing up and down with the aid of an extendable rope kept locked in a 
toolbox during the day — since gas, which for some years had been blazing in 
English towns, had yet to he supplied. The merchants who sold the oil and the 
Argand lamps wished to avoid all favorable mention of this other source of light, 



and they soon found two highly reputable writers, messieurs Charles Nodier and 
Amedee Pichot, ... to denounce, ... in octavo format, all the problems and per- 
versities connected with gas, including the danger of our complete annihilation by 
explosion at the hands of malefactors." Nadar, Quand j'etais photographe (Paris 
<1900>), pp. 289-290. [T2a,3] 

Fireworks and illuminations were already on the scene during the Restoration; 
they were set off whenever a measure proposed by the ultraroyalists was defeated 
in the Chamber. [T2a,4] 

Apropos of an institute for the blind and the insane, this excursus on electric light: 
"I come now to the facts. The bright light of electricity served, at first, to illumi- 
nate the subterranean galleries of mines; after that, public squares and streets; 
then factories, workshops, stores, theaters, military barracks; finally, the domes- 
tic interior. The eyes, initially, put up rather well with this penetrating new enemy; 
but, by degrees, they were dazzled. Blindness began as something temporary, soon 
became periodic, and ended as a chronic problem. This, then, was the first re- 
sult — sufficiently comprehensible, I believe; but what about the insanity lately 
visited on our leaders? — Our great heads of finance, industry, big business have 
seen fit ... to send . . . their thoughts around the world, while they themselves 
remain at rest. ... To this end, each of them has nailed up, in a corner of his 
office, electric wires connecting his executive desk with our colonies in Africa, 
Asia, and the Americas. Comfortably seated before his schedules and account 
books, he can communicate directly over tremendous distances; at a touch of the 
finger, he can receive reports from all his far-flung agents on a startling variety of 
matters. One branch-correspondent tells him, at ten in the morning, of a ship- 
wrecked vessel worth over a million . . .; another, at five after ten, of the unex- 
pected sale of the most prosperous house in the two Americas; a third, at ten after 
ten, of the glorious entrance, into the port of Marseilles, of a freighter carrying the 
fruits of a Northern California harvest. All this in rapid succession. The poor 
brains of these men, robust as they were, have simply given way, just as the 
shoulders of some Hercules of the marketplace would give way if he ventured to 
load them with ten sacks of wheat instead of one. And this was the second result." 
Jacques Fahien, Paris en songe (Paris, 1863), pp. 96-98. [T3,l] 

Julien Lemer, Paris augaz (Paris, 1861): "I close the curtains on the sun. It is well 
and duly put to rest; let us speak no more of it. Henceforth, I shall know no other 
light than that of gas" (p. 10). The volume contains three novellas in addition to 
the Parisian vignettes, of which the first gives it its title. [T3,2] 

In the Place de l'Hotel de Ville: ' — aronud 1848 — there was a Cafe du Gaz. 

[T3,3] 

The misfortunes of Aime Argand. The various improvements he made in the old oil 
lamp — the double current of air, the fuse woven in the shape of a hollow cylinder, 



o 
a. 



the glass tubing, and so forth — were at first laid claim to by Lange in England (a 
man with whom Argand had been associated), before being stolen in Paris by 
Quinquet, who gave his name to the invention. And thus Argand ended in misery: 
"The misanthropy to which he succumbed after the withdrawal of his patent led 
him to seek a compensation of sorts in the occult sciences. . . . 'During the last 
years of his life, he was seen wandering through graveyards gathering bones and 
dust from tombs, which he would then submit to chemical processes in the hope 
of finding in death the secret of prolonging life.'" He himself died young. 
A<ntoinette> Drohojowska, Les Grandes Industries de la France: L'Eclairage 
(Paris <1881>),p. 127. [T3a,l] 

Carcel, inventor of the lamp that operates by clockwork. Such a lamp has to be 
wound up. It contains a clockwork mechanism that pumps the oil from a reservoir 
at the bottom up into the wick. Carcel's advance over earlier oil lamps — which had 
the reservoir located above the wick, whence the oil dripped down — consisted in 
eliminating the shadow caused by this overlying reservoir. His invention dates 
from 1800. His enseigne: "B.-G. Carcel, inventor of the Lycnomenes, or mechani- 
cal lamps, manufactures said lamps." [T3a,2] 

"The chemical match is, without doubt, one of the vilest devices that civilization 
has yet produced. ... It is thanks to this that each of us carries around fire in his 
pocket. . . . I . . . detest this permanent plague, always primed to trigger an explo- 
sion, always ready to roast humanity individually over a low flame. If you follow 
M. Alphonse Karr in his crusade against tobacco, you should likewise raise the 
banner in opposition to these matches. ... If we did not have in our pockets the 
possibility of making smoke, we would smoke less." H<enri> de Pene, Paris intime 
(Paris, 1859), pp. 119-120. [T3a,3] 

According to Lurine ("Les Boulevarts," in Paris chez soi < Paris, 1854<>): the first 
gas lighting — 1817, in the Passage des Panoramas. [T3a,4] 

Regarding the definitive installation of street lamps in the streets of Paris (in 
March 1667): "I know of no one but the abbe Terrasson, among the men of letters, 
who spoke ill of the lanterns. . . . According to him, decadence in the realm of 
letters hegan with the establishment of street lights. 'Before this period,' he once 
said, 'everyone returned home early, from fear of losing their lives, and this fact 
worked to the advantage of labor. Nowadays, people stay out at night, and work 
less. ' Surely there is truth in this observation and the invention of gas is not likely 
to give it the lie." Edouard Fournier, Les Lanternes: Histoire de Vancien eclairage 
de Paris (Paris, 1854), p. 25. [T3a,5] 



In the second half of the 1760s, a number of pamphlets were published that dealt 
with the new street lights in poetical form. The following verses come from the 
poem "Les Sultanes nocturnes et ambulantes contre Nosseigneurs les reverberes: 



A la petite vertu" <The Strolling Sultanas of Night against Our Lords the Street 
Lamps: To Easy Virtue) , 1.769: 



The poor woman finds, instead 

Of lovers, only lampposts 

In this dazzling town, 

Once a second Cythera, 

Where nymphs would walk. 

Tender mothers of delight, 

They are forced today 

To squeeze themselves into a box, 

In other words, an octogenarian fiacre, 

Which, by way of B., or F., takes them 

To where fiacres have nothing to do. . . . 

Misericordia, when once the night 

Will let you leave the hovel; 

For life is so needy. 

Not a single corner or carrefour 

The street light does not reach. 

It is a burning-glass that pierces through 

The plans we made by day. . . . 

Edonard Fournier, Les Lanternes: Histoire de I'ancien eclairage de Paris (Paris, 
1854), p. 5 (from the specially paginated printing of the poem). [T4,l] 

In 1799, an engineer installed gas lighting in his house, and thus put into practice 
what previously had been known only as an experiment in the physicist's labora- 
tory. [T4,2] 

It is possible, yon know, to avoid these setbacks 
By choosing the shelter of covered arcades; 
Though, in these lanes the idler favors, 
Spirals of blue smoke rise from Plavanas. 

Make for us, hy your efforts, a gentler life, 
Clear from our path all bumps and jolts, 
And ward off, for a time, the deadly volcanoes 
Of reading rooms and restaurants. 
At dusk, give orders to search 
Those spots defiled by the odorless gas, 
And to sound the alarm with cries of fear 
At the seeping in of flammable fumes. 

Barthelemy, Paris: Revue satirique « M. G. Delessert (Paris, 1838), p. 16. [T4,3] 

'"What a splendid invention this gas lighting is!' Gottfried Semper exclaims. 'In 
how may different ways has it not enriched the festive occasions of life (not to 
mention its infinite importance for our practical needs)!' This striking preemi- 
nence of the festive over the daily, or rather the nightly, imperatives — for, thanks 



to this general illumination, urban nighttime itself becomes a sort of ongoing ani- 
mated festival — clearly betrays the oriental character of this form of lighting. . . . 
The fact that in Berlin, after what is now twenty years of operation, a gas company 
can boast of scarcely ten thousand private customers in the year 1846 can be . . . 
explained ... in the following manner: 'For the most part, of course, one could 
point to general commercial and social factors to account for this phenomenon; 
there was still, in fact, no real need for increased activity during the evening and 
nighttime hours.'" Dolf Sternberger, Pmnorama (Hamburg, 1938), pp. 201, 202. 
Citations from Gottfried Semper, Wissenschaft: Industrie unci Kunst (Brunswick, 
1852), p. 12; and from Handbuch fur Steinkohlengasbeleuchtung, ed. N. H. 
Schilling (Munich, 1879), p. 21. [T4a,l] 

Apropos of the covering over of the sky in the big city as a consequence of 
artificial illumination, a sentence from Vladimir Odoievsky's "The Smile of the 
Dead": "Vainly he awaited the gaze that would open up to him." Similar is the 
motif of the blind men in Baudelaire, which goes back to "Des Vetters Eck- 
fenster." 1 [T4a,2] 

Gaslight and electricity. "I reached the Champs-Elysees, where the ca fes concerts 
seemed like blazing hearths among the leaves. The chestnut trees, brushed with 
yellow light, had the look of painted objects, the look of phosphorescent trees. And 
the electric globes — like shimmering, pale moons, like moon eggs fallen from the 
sky, like monstrous, living pearls — dimmed, with their nacreous glow, mysterious 
and regal, the (taring jets of gas, of ugly, dirty gas, and the garlands of colored 
glass." Guy de Maupassant, Claire de lune (Paris, 1909), p. 122 ("La Nuit cauche- 
mar" <The Nightmare) ). [T4a,3] 

Gaslight in Maupassant: "Everything was clear in the mild night air, from the 
planets down to the gas lamps. So much fire shone there above, just as in the 
town, that the shadows themselves seemed luminous. The glittering nights are 
merrier than the brightest of sunny days." Guy de Maupassant, Claire de lune 
(Paris, 1909), p. 121 ("La Nuit cauchemar"). In the last sentence, one finds the 
quintessence of the "Italian night" [T5,l] 

The cashier, by gaslight, as living image — as allegory of the cash register. [T5,2] 

Poe in the "Philosophy of Furniture": "Glare is a leading error in the philosophy 
of American household decoration. . . . We are violently enamored of gas and of 
glass. The former is totally inadmissible within doors. Its harsh and unsteady light 
offends. No one having both brains and eyes will use it." Charles Baudelaire, 
Oeuvres completes, ed. Crepet (Paris, 1937), p. 207 (Histoires grotesques et 
serieuses par Edgar Poe). r ' [T5,3] 