[Saint-Simon, Railroads] 



"Characteristic of the entire period up to 1830 is the slowness of the spread of 
machines .... The mentality of entrepreneurs, economically speaking, was still 
conservative; otherwise, the import duty on steam engines, which were not yet 
produced hy more than a handful of factories in France, could not have been 
raised to 30 percent of the value. French industry at the time of the Restoration 
was thus still, in essence, thoroughly tied to the prerevolutionary regime." Willy 
Spiihler, Der Saint-Simonismus: Lehre unci Leben von Saint-Amand Bazmrcl (Zu- 
rich, 1926), p. 12. [Ul,l] 

"Corresponding to the laborious development of large-scale industry is the slow 
formation of the modern proletariat. . . . The actual proletarianization ... of the 
working masses is effected only at the end of the 1830s and 1840s." Spiihler, Der 
Saint-Simonismus, p. 13. [Ul,2] 

"During the whole period of the Restoration . . . the Chamber of Deputies followed 
a commercial policy of the most extreme protectionism. . . . The old theory of a 
halance of trade was again in full swing, as in the days of mercantilism." Spiihler, 
Der Saint-Simonismus (Zurich, 1926), pp. 10-11. [Ul,3] 

"It was only in 1841 that a modest little law concerning child labor was approved. 
Of interest is the objection of the famous physicist Gay-Lussac, who saw in the 
intervention "an onset of Saint-Simonianism or of phalansterianism." Spiihler, 
Der Saint-Simonismus, p. 15. [Ul,4] 

"Aphrodite's hirds travel the skies from Paris to Amsterdam, and under their wing 
is clipped a list of daily quotations from the Stock Exchange; a telegraph sends a 
message from Paris to Brussels concerning the rise in 3 percent annuities; couriers 
gallop over highways on panting horses; the ambassadors of real kings bargain 
with ideal Icings, and Nathan Rothschild in London will show you, if you pay him a 
visit, a casket just arrived from Brazil with freshly mined diamonds intended to 
cover the interest on the current Brazilian debt. Isn't that interesting?" Karl 
Gutzkow, Offentliche Charaktere, part 1 (Hamburg, 1835), p. 280 ("Roth- 
schild"). [Ul,5] 



"The influence and development of Saint Simonianism, up until the end of the 
nineteenth century, had almost nothing to do with the working class. Saint-Simoni- 
anism provided an impetus and an ideal for the spirit of large-scale industry and 
for the realization of ambitious works. The Saint-Simonian Pereire brothers con- 
trolled the railroad, banking, and real estate operations of the July Monarchy and 
the Second Empire. The Suez Canal, for which Enf antin and Lambert-Bey would 
study the plans and work out the conception at a time when Ferdinand de Lesseps 
was consul in Cairo, has remained the prototype of the Saint-Simonian planetary 
enterprise. We may, without hesitation, contrast the grand bourgeois project of 
Saint-Simonianism, which is based on production and action, with the petit bour- 
geois project of the Fourierist phalanstery, which is based on consumption and 
pleasure." Albert Thihaudet, Les Idees politiques de la France (Paris, 1932), 
pp. 61-62 . □ Secret Societies D [Ul,6] 

"Girardin . . . founded La Presse in 1836; he invented the popular, low-priced 
newspaper and the roman feuilleton, or serial novel." Dubech and d'Espezel, 
Histoire de Paris (Paris, 1926), p. 391. [Ul,7] 

"In the past several years, a complete revolution has occurred in the cafes of 
Paris. Cigars and pipes have invaded every corner. Formerly, there was smoking 
only in certain special establishments known as estaminets < public houses > , which 
were frequented solely by persons of low standing; today people smoke nearly 
everywhere. . . . There is one thing we cannot forgive the princes of the house of 
Orleans — namely, for having so prodigiously increased the vogue for tohacco, this 
malodorous and nauseating plant that poisons both mind and body. All the sons of 
Louis Philippe smoked like chimneys ; no one encouraged the consumption of this 
nasty product more than they. Such consumption no doubt fattened the public 
treasury — but at the expense of public health and human intelligence." Histoire 
des cafes de Paris, extraite des memoirs d'un viveur (Paris, 1857), pp. 91-92. 

[Ula.l] 

"Symbolism is so deeply rooted . . . that it is found not just in liturgical rites. In 
the previous century, didn't the disciples of Enfantin wear waistcoats that hut- 
toned in the back, so as to draw attention to the fraternal assistance which one 
man renders another?" Robert Jacquin, Notions sur le langage d'apres les 
travauxdu P<ere> Marcel Jousse (Paris, 1929), p. 22. [Ula,2] 

"In 1807, there were over 90,000 workers in Paris practicing 126 professions. 
They were subject to strict supervision: associations were prohibited, employment 
agencies were regulated, and work hours were fixed. Salaries went from 2 francs 
50, to 4 francs 20, yielding an average of 3 francs 35. The worker ate a hearty 
breakfast, a light lunch, and an evening supper." Lucien Dubech and Pierre 
d'Espezel, Histoire de Paris (Paris, 1926), p. 335. [Ula,3] 



"On August 27, 1817, the steamship he Genie du commerce, invented by the Mar- 
quis de Jouffroy, had sailed the Seine between the Pont-Royal and the Pont Louis 
XVI." Duhech and d'Espezel, Histoire de Paris, p. 359. [Ula,4] 



The national workshops' "had been created according to the proposal of a moder- 
ate, <Alexandre-Thomas> Marie, because the Revolution had guaranteed the ex- 
istence of the worker through his work, and because it was necessary to satisfy the 
demands of the extremists. . . . The workshops were organized, in a manner at 
once democratic and militaristic, into brigades, with elected chiefs." Dubech and 
d'Espezel, Histoire de Paris, pp. 398-399. [Ula,5] 

The Saint-Simonians. "In the magnificent disorder of ideas that accompanied Ro- 
manticism, they had grown enough, by 1830, to abandon their loft on the Rue 
Taranne and to establish themselves on the Rue Taitbout. Here, they gave lectures 
before an audience of young men dressed in blue and women in white with violet 
scarves. They had acquired the newspaper he Globe, and in its pages they advo- 
cated a program of reforms. . . . The government, ... on the pretext of supporting 
the emancipation of women, decided to prosecute the Saint-Simonians. They came 
to the hearing in full regalia, and to the accompaniment of hunting horns. Enf an- 
tin wore written on his chest, in large letters, the two words he Pere, and he calmly 
declared to the presiding judge that he was in fact the father of humanity. He then 
tried to hypnotize the magistrates by staring into their eyes. He was sentenced to 
one year in prison, which effectively put an end to these follies." Dubech and 
d'Espezel, Histoire de Paris, pp. 392-393. D Haussmann D Secret Societies □ 

[Ula,6] 

"Girardin published ... a brochure with the title, "Why a Constitution?" It was 
his idea that the entire French constitution should be replaced by a simple declara- 
tion of ten lines, which . . . would be engraved on the five-franc piece." S. Engliin- 
der <Geschichte derfranzdsischenArbeiter-Associationen (Hamburg, 1864) > , vol. 
4, pp. 133-134. [Ula,7] 

"At the time of the Revolution, anew element began to appear in Paris: large-scale 
industry. This was a consequence of the disappearance of feudal guilds; of the 
reign of unfettered liberty that followed in their wake; and of the wars against 
England, which made necessary the production of items previously procured by 
import. By the end of the Empire, the evolution was complete. From the revolu- 
tionary period on, there were factories established for the production of saltpeter, 
firearms, woolen and cotton fabrics, preserved meat, and small utensils. Mechani- 
cal spinning mills for cotton and linen were developed, with the encouragement of 
Calonne, beginning in 1785; factories for the production of bronze were con- 
structed under Louis XVI; and chemical and dying companies were founded by the 
Count d'Artois in Javel. Didot Saint-Leger ran a new machine for paper produc- 
tion on the Rue Sainte-Anne. In 1799, Philippe Lebon received a patent on a 



process for producing gas lighting. From September 22 to September 30, 1798, the 
first ' public exhibition of the products of French manufacturing and industry' was 
held on the Champ de Mars." Dubech and d'Espezel, Histoire de Paris (Paris, 
1926), p. 324. D Exhibitions D [U2,l] 

On the Saint-Simonians: "School constituted by a veritable corps of industrial 
engineers and entrepreneurs, representatives of big business underwritten by the 
power of the banks." A. Pinloche, Fourier et le socialisme (Paris, 1933), p. 47. 

[U2.2] 

"Although the worker associations were all run in exemplary fashion, ably and 
honestly, . . . members of the bourgeoisie were nevertheless unanimous in their 
disapproval. Most of the bourgeoisie would feel a certain apprehension in passing 
before one of the houses that bore the sign . . . and the emblem of a worker 
association. Though these shops were distinguished from other, similar businesses 
only by the inscription 'Association fraternelle d'ouvriers: Liberte, Egalite, 
Fraternite,' on the petit bourgeois they had the effect of snakes in the grass that 
might suddenly strike at any time. It sufficed for the bourgeois to think of the 
February Revolution, which had been the origin of these associations. . . . For 
their part, the associations of workers made every possible effort to conciliate the 
bourgeoisie, hoping to gain its support. It was for this reason that many of them 
furnished their shops in the most splendid manner, so as to draw their share of 
customers. The privations which the workers thus laid upon themselves, in an 
effort to withstand the competition, are beyond belief. While that part of the shop 
which was open to the public was fi tted out in the costliest way, the worker himself 
would be sitting on the floor of a workroom that often was totally lacking in equip- 
ment." Sigmund Englander, Geschichte der franzdsischen Arbeiter-Associationen 
(Hamburg, 1864), vol. 3, pp. 106-108. □ Secret Societies D [U2,3] 

Influence of the f euilleton in its early days. "There are newspapers for one sou and 
newspapers for ten centimes. A dealer observes a solid bourgeois passing by, who, 
after carefully perusing his Constitutionnel . . . , negligently folds it and puts it in 
his pocket. The dealer accosts this plucky reader, presents him with either Le 
Peuple or La Revolution, which cost only a sou, and says to him: 'Monsieur, if you 
like, I will give you, in exchange for the paper you've just finished, Le Peuple, by 
citizen Proudhon, and its supplement containing a serial by the famous Menars- 
Senneville. ' The bourgeois allows himself to he persuaded. What good is a Consti- 
tutionnel you've already read? He gives up his newspaper and accepts the other, 
enticed, as he is, by the sovereign name of Menars-Senneville. Often he forgets 
himself, in his delight at being rid of so tedious a burden, and adds another sou 
into the bargain." A. Privat d'Anglemont, Paris inconnu (Paris, 1861), pp. 155- 
156. [U2a,l] 



The well-known principle of Villemessant: "that an incident which is completely 
ordinary, but which occurs on the boulevards or their environs, has much more 



importance, from the point of view of journalism, than an event of great conse- 
quence in America or Asia." Jean Morienval, Les Createurs de lagrande presse en 
France (Paris <1934>), p. 132. [U2a,2] 



'''L'Autographe was run hy Bourdin, 2 hecause Villemessant, like Napoleon, loved 
to apportion kingdoms. That curious man, very independent of spirit, rarely 
acted alone. He would 'collaborate.'" Jean Morienval, Les Createurs de lagrande 
presse en France (Paris), p. 142. [U2a,3] 

Poetry of Saint-Simonianism: "In the preface to the first volume of Le Producteur, 
A. Cerclet launches an urgent appeal to artists. . . . And Buchez, who later suc- 
ceeded to the leadership of the cooperative movement, appealed to the community 
of artists in similar terms. ... It was Buchez who first observed . . . that classicism 
and romanticism share equally in the world with which they — the Saint-Simoni- 
ans — are occupied, just as legitimacy and liberalism divide between themselves the 
political world. ... In 1825, a monument was erected to the builder of the Langue- 
doc Canal, Pierre Riquet. On this occasion, Soumet composed a stirring 
hymn. . . . The literary chronicler for Le Producteur, Leon Halevy, brother of the 
famous composer, hailed these verses, which he characterized as 'industrial po- 
etry.' . . . Soumet, however, only partly fulfilled the hopes which the Saint- 
Simonians had placed in him. If later on, in his Divine Epopee, one can still hear 
the hammer's clang and the noisy grinding of the gears of industrial labor, it is 
precisely here, in the poet's greatest work, that the propensity for metaphysical 
abstractions is manifest. . . . Halevy, moreover, was himself a poet. ... In 1828 
Halevy published his Poesies europeennes, . . . and in 1831 wrote an ode to Saint- 
Simon, who had died in 1825." H. Thurow, "Aus den Anfangeu der sozialistischen 
Belletristik," Die neue Zeit, 21, no. 2 (Stuttgart, 1903), pp. 217-219. [U2a,4] 

On a review by Sainte-Beuve in the Revue des deux mondes, Fehruary 15, 1833: 
"The verses which Sainte-Beuve . . . reviewed were the literary remains of a poet 
hy the name of Bruheille, who died very young. . . . In his account, furthermore, 
Sainte-Beuve draws attention to a novel which bore the characteristic title La 
Saint-Simonienne, and which . . . demonstrates the triumph of the Saint-Simonian 
idea. That the author, a certain Madame Le Bassu, brings about this triumph 
through a rather improhahle course of events — namely, the transfusion of blood 
from the veins of a youth infected with Saint-Simonian doctrine into those of his 
ecclesiastically educated beloved — may be regarded in essence as an artistic expe- 
dient; at the same time, however, it brings out the mystical side of Saint-Simonian- 
ism. This mystical element had, shortly before, found stark expression during the 
sojourn by the 'family' in their last place of refuge, on the RueMenilmontant. This 
concluding episode in the life of the movement likewise engendered a correspond- 
ing literature — poems, songs, spiritual exercises in verse and prose — whose enig- 
matic symholism could he understood only by the few initiates .... Thrown off 
course by the violence of political and economic developments, Saint-Simonianism 



had run aground on metaphysics." H. Thurow, "Aus den Anfangen der sozialistis- 
chenBelletristik," DieneueZeit, 21, no. 2 (Stuttgart, 1903), pp. 219-220. [U3,l] 



Utopian socialism. "The class of capitalists . . . looked on its partisans as mere 
eccentrics and harmless enthusiasts. . . . These partisans themselves, further- 
more, did all that was humanly possible ... to warrant such an impression. They 
wore clothes of a very particular cut (Saint-Simonians, for example, buttoned 
their coats in the back so as to be reminded, while dressing, of their reliance on 
their fellow man and thereby of the need for union), or else they wore unusually 
large hats, very long beards, and so on." Paul Lafargue, "Der Klassenkampf in 
Frankreich," Die neue Zeit, 12, no. 2, p. 618. [U3,2] 

"After the July Revolution, the Saint-Simonians took over even the frontline or- 
gan of the Romantics, he Globe. Pierre Leroux became the editor." Franz Died- 
erich, "Victor Hugo," Die neue Zeit, 20, no. 1 (Stuttgart, 1901), p. 651. [U3,3] 

From a report on the November 1911 issue of the journal of Austrian social democ- 
racy, Der Kampf: '"On Saint-Simon's 150th birthday,' . . . Max Adler wrote: . . . 
He was known as a 'socialist' at a time when this word meant something entirely 
different from what it means today. ... As far as the class struggle is concerned, he 
sees only the opposition of industrialism to the old regime; bourgeoisie and work- 
ers he considers together as a single industrial class, whose richer members he 
calls upon to take an interest in the lot of their impoverished fellow workers. 
Fourier had a clearer view of the need for a new form of society." Review of 
Periodicals, Die neue Zeit, 29, no. 1 (1911), pp. 383-384. [U3,4] 

Engels on Feuerbach's Wesen des Christentums <Essence of Christianity) . "Even 
the shortcomings of the book contributed to its immediate effect. Its literary, 
sometimes even high-flown, style secured for it a large public and was, at any rate, 
refreshing after long years of abstract and ahstruse Hegelianizing. The same is 
true of its extravagant deification of love, which, coining after the now intolerable 
sovereign rule of 'pure reason,' had its excuse. . . . But what we must not forget is 
that it was precisely these two weaknesses of Feuerbach that 'true socialism,' 
which had been spreading like a plague in 'educated' Germany since 1844, took as 
its starting point, putting literary phrases in the place of scientific knowledge, the 
liberation of mankind by means of 'love' in place of the emancipation of the 
proletariat through the economic transformation of production — in short, losing 
itself in the nauseous fine writing and ecstasies of love typified hy Herr Karl 
Griin." Friedrich Engels, "Ludwig Feuerbach und der Ausgang der klassischen 
deutschen Philosophic," Die neue Zeit, 4 (Stuttgart, 1886), p. 150 [review of C. N. 
Starcke, Ludwig Feuerbach (Stuttgart, 1885)]. 3 [U3a,l] 

"Railroads . . . demanded, besides other impossibilities, a transformation in the 
mode of property. . . . Up until then, in fact, a bourgeois could run an industrial 
or a business concern with only his own money, or at most with that of one or two 



friends and acquaintances. . . . He managed the money himself, and was the actual 
proprietor of the factory or business establishment. But railroads had need of 
such massive amounts of capital that it could no longer be concentrated in the 
hands of only a few individuals. And so a great many bourgeois were forced to 
entrust their precious funds, which had never before been allowed out of their 
sight, to people whose names they hardly knew. . . . Once the money was given 
over, they would lose all control over its investment and could not expect to claim 
any proprietary rights over terminals, cars, locomotives, and the like. . . . They 
were entitled only to a share of the profits; in place of an object, . . . they were 
given ... a mere piece of paper that represented the fiction of an infinitely small 
and ungraspable piece of the real property, whose name was printed at the bottom 
in large letters. . . . This procedure . . . stood in such violent contrast to what the 
hourgeoisie was used to . . . that its defense could be undertaken only by people 
who . . . were suspected of wanting to overthrow the order of society — socialists, in 
short. First Fourier and then Saint-Simon extolled this mobilization of property in 
the form of paper securities." Paul Laf argue, "Marx' historischer Materialismus," 
Die neue Zeit, 22, no. 1 (Stuttgart, 1904), p. 831. [U3a,2] 

"Every day, there is a riot. The students, all sons of the bourgeoisie, are fraterniz- 
ing here with the workers, and the workers believe the time has come. They are 
also seriously counting on the pupils from the Ecole Polyteehnique." Nadai', 
Quancl j'etais photographe (Paris <1900>), p. 287. [U3a,3] 

"It is not in proletarian circles, not even in democratic circles, that the initial 
impetus . . . for the establishment of labor exchanges is to be found. The idea was 
first advanced in 1842 by M. de Molinari, editor-in-chief of he Journaldes econo- 
mistes. It was Molinari himself who developed this idea in an article he . . . wrote 
entitled 'L'Avenir des chemins de fer' <The Future of the Railroads) . In order to 
indicate just how much times had changed, he referred to Adam Smith, who had 
said, in effect, that labor was the commodity most difficult to transport. Against 
this, he affirmed that labor power had now become mohile. Europe and the whole 
world now stands open to it as a market. . . . The main point of the conclusion 
which Molinari drew in 'L'Avenir des chemins de fer,' in favor of the institutions 
that were to serve as labor exchanges, was the following: the principal cause for 
the low rate of wages is the frequently recurring disproportion hetween the num- 
her of workers and the demand for work; contributing further to the problem is 
the high concentration of workers population in certain centers of production. . . . 
Give to workers the means ... by which they can change their place of residence at 
low cost; give them, too, the possibility of knowing where they will be able to find 
work in the most favorable circumstances. . . . If workers begin traveling quickly 
and, ahove all, cheaply, labor exchanges will soon arise." On the proposal to 
create a labor report: "This proposal, which was published in Le Courrier 
franqais, edited by Xavier Durrieu, turned matters directly to the workers . . . : 
'We would like ... to render a service to workers by publishing in our columns, 
next to the stock market quotations, a list of work available. . . . What is the 



purpose of stock market quotations? They report, as we know, the rate of ex- 
change of government securities and shares of stock ... on various markets 
around the world. . . . Without the aid of these market reports, the capitalists 
would often have no idea where to invest their money; without these lists, they 
would find themselves in the same situation as workers who . . . have no idea where 
to go to find work. . . . The worker is a vendor of work, and, as such, he has a very 
material interest in knowing what the market outlets are for his goods.'" Louis 
Heritier, "Die Arbeitsborsen, Die neue Zeit, 14, no. 1 (Stuttgart, 1896), pp. 645- 
647. [U4,l] 

Notable difference between Saint-Simon and Marx. The former fixes the number 
of exploited as high as possible, reckoning among them even the entrepreneur 
because he pays interest to his creditors. Marx, on the other hand, includes all 
those who in any way exploit another — even though they themselves may be 
victims of exploitation — among the bourgeoisie. [U4,2] 

It is significant that the theoreticians of Saint -Simonianism are unfamiliar with the 
distinction between industrial and financial capital. All social antinomies dissolve 
in the fairyland which le p-ogres projects for the near future. [U4a,l] 

"Let us examine some of the large manufacturing cities of France. , , . Never, 
perhaps, has a defeated and retreating army presented a more lamentable specta- 
cle than the triumphant industrial army. Gaze on the workers of Lille, Reims, 
Mulhouse, Manchester, and Liverpool, and tell me if they look like victors!" 
Eugene Buret, De la Misere des classes laborieuses en Angleterre et en France 
(Paris, 1840), vol. 1, p. 67. [U4a,2] 

On the political role of intellectuals. Important: the "Letter to M. Lamartine" by 
Emile Barrault, editor of Le Itcsin des travailleurs. ["Die socialistischen und com- 
munistischen Bewegungen seit der dritten franzosischen Revolution," appendix 
to <Lorenz von> Stein, Socialumus und Communismus des heutigen Frankreichs 
(Leipzig and Vienna, 1848), p. 240.] [U4a,3] 

To ascertain: whether or not, in the preimperial age, a relatively greater propor- 
tion of the profits of capital went into consumption and a relatively lesser propor- 
tion into new investments. [U4a,4] 

1860: "Napoleon entered into a trade agreement with the English government . . . ; 
according to the provisions of this treaty, customs duties were considerably low- 
ered on French agricultural products imported by England, and on English manu- 
factured goods imported by France. This treaty was very favorable to the mass 
public. . . . On the other hand, in order to hold their own against English competi- 
tion, French industry was forced to lower the prices of its products. The immedi- 
ate consequence was ... a certain rapprochement with the opposition. Aiming to 
counter the resistance of . . . industrialists, Napoleon took steps to enlist the sup- 
port of the liberals. This led, ultimately, to the transformation of the regime and 



the emergence of the Liberal Empire." A. Malet and P. Grillet, XIX" Siecle (Paris, 
1919), p. 275. (Loosening of controls on the press, so as to enable coverage of 
debates in tbe Chamber.) [U4a,5] 



Classification of the press under the Restoration. TJltras<?>: La Gazette de 
France, La Quotidienne, Le Drapeau blanc, Le Journal des debuts (until 1824). 
Independents: Le Globe, Le Minerve, and, from 1830, during the last year of the 
Restoration, Le National, Le Temps. Constitutionalists: Le Constitutionnel, Le 
Courrierfruncuis, and, after 1824, Le Journal des debuts. [U4a,6] 

Because of the rarity of newspapers, they were read by groups m the cafes. 
Otherwise, they were available only by subscription, which cost around eighty 
francs per year. In 1824, the twelve most widely circulating newspapers had, 
together, some 56,000 subscribers. For the rest, both the liberals and the royalists 
were concerned to keep the lower classes away from the newspaper. [U4a,7] 

The "law of justice and of love," rejected by the Chamber of Peers: "One detail 
suffices to demonstrate the spirit of the project: every printed sheet, be it only a 
notification card, would have been subject to a tax of one franc per copy." 
A. Malet and P. Grillet, XIX" Siecle (Paris, 1919), p. 56. ;f [U5,l] 

"Saint-Simon lingers over the history of the fifteenth-eighteenth centuries, and 
gives to the social classes of this period a more concrete and specifically economic 
description. Hence, it is this part of Saint-Simon's system that is of greatest impor- 
tance for the genesis of the theory of class struggle, and that exercises the strongest 
influence on its subsequent development. . . . Although, for later periods, Saint- 
Simon emphasizes the economic moment in his characterization of classes and the 
causes of their growth and decline . . . , in order to be consistent he would have 
had to see, in this economic activity, the true roots of the social classes as well. Had 
he taken this step, he would inevitably have attained to a materialist conception of 
history. But Saint-Simon never took this step, and his general conception remains 
idealist. . . . The second point that is so surprising in Saint-Simon's class theory, in 
view of its discrepancy with the actual relations among the classes of the period, is 
the representation of the class of industrialists as homogeneous. . . . The mani- 
festly essential differences that exist between proletarians and entrepreneurs are 
for him external, and their antagonism is grounded in mutual misunderstanding: 
the interests of the directors of industrial enterprises, in reality, coincide with the 
interests of the masses. . . . This entirely unfounded assertion resolves for Saint- 
Simon the very real social contradiction, salvaging the unity of the industrial class 
and, with it, the perspective on a peaceful building-up of the new social system." 
V. Volgin, "IJher die historische Stellung Saint-Simons," in Murx-Engels Archiv, 
ed. D. Rjazanov, vol. 1 (Frankfurt am Main <1928>), pp. 97-99. [U5,2] 

Saint-Simon: "Least of all does the industrial system require the overseeing of 
individuals, for with a system in which the immediate goal is the well-being of the 
many, there ought not to be any energy wasted on maintaining power over these 



people, who no longer threaten the existing order. . . . 'This function of maintain- 
ing order can then easily become ... a task shared by all citizens, whether it be to 
contain troublemakers or to settle disputes.' 4 Instead of an instrument for the 
domination of men, the state system becomes a system for the administration of 
things .... And the chief task of this administrative authority, whose agents will b e 
the scholars, artists, and industrialists, ... is to organize the cultivation of the 
terrestrial globe." V. Volgin, "IJher die historische Stellung Saint-Simons," in 
Marx-Engels Archiv, ed. D. Rjazanov, vol. 1 (Frankfurt am Main), pp. 104r-105. 

[U5.3] 

On the idea of the total work of art, according to Saint-Simon, Oeuvres choisies, 
vol. 3, pp. 358-360: "Saint-Simon indulges in fantasies about the development of a 
cult through the combined efforts of prophets, poets, musicians, sculptors, and 
architects. All the arts are to be united so as to make the cult useful to society, and 
so as, through the cult, to restructure humanity in the spirit of Christian morals." 
V. V«lgin, "Uber die historische Stellung Saint-Simons," in Marx-Engels Archiv, 
vol. 1 (Frankfurt am Main), p. 109. [U5a,l] 

Concerning the representation of Louis Philippe. — Saint-Simon teaches that "the 
industrial system is not in contradiction with royal power. The king will become 
the First Industrial, just as he has been the First Soldier in the kingdom."^ V. Vol- 
gin, "IJher die historische Stellung Saint-Simons," in Marx-Engels Archiv, vol. 1 
(Frankfurt am Main), p. 112. [U5a,2] 

Saint-Simon was a forerunner of the technocrats. [U5a,3] 

Two passages from he Globe (October 31 and November 25, 1831), concerning the 
workers' uprising in Lyons: "we, defenders of ALL workers — from the leaders of 
industry to the humblest laborers"; and concerning the working class: "It is ago- 
nizing for us to see the workers degraded by brutality. Our heart bleeds at the sight 
of such moral privations, quite as hideous, in their way, as physical priva- 
tions. . . . We would like ... to inspire the workers with . . . our own sentiments of 
order, peace, and friendly accord." In the same publication, an expression of 
approval for the address of the Saint-Simonians from Lyons, who "have preserved 
Saint-Simonian calm." Cited in E. Tarle, "Der Lyoner Arbeiteraufstand," in 
Marx-Engels Archiv, ed. Rjazanov, vol. 2 (Frankfurt am Main, 1928), pp. 108, 
109,111. [U5a,4] 

Important material relating to the history of the railroad, and particularly of the 
locomotive, in Karl Kautsky, Die materialutuche Geschiclitsaujfkssung, vol. 1 (Ber- 
lin, 1927), pp. 645ff. What emerges is the great importance of mining for the 
railroads, not only because locomotives were first used in mines but also because 
iron rails came from there. We are thus referred back to the use that was made of 
rails (originally, no doubt, of wood) in the operation of tipcarts. [U5a,5] 



On Saint-Simon's idea of progress (polytheism, monotheism, recognition of 
many laws of nature, recognition of a single law of nature): "Gravitation is 
supposed to play the role of the universal absolute idea and replace the idea of 
God." Oeuvres chokies, vol. 2, p. 219,° cited by V. Volgin, "Dber die historische 
Stellung Saint-Simons," in Marx-Engels Archiv, vol. 1 (Frankfurt am Main), 
p. 106. [U5a,6] 

"In the system of the Saint-Simonians, hanks not only play the part of forces that 
organize industry. They are the one antidote which the system now in place has 
developed to counter the anarchy that devours it; they arc an element of the 
system of the future . . . , one that is free of the stimulant of personal enrichment; 
they are a social institution." V. Volgiu, "IJher die historische Stellung Saint- 
Simons," in Marx-Engels Archiv, ed. Rjazanov, vol. 1 (Frankfurt am Main), p. 94. 

[U6.1] 

"The chief task of an industrial system is said to he the establishment of a . . . plan 
of work that could be carried out by society. . . . But . . . his ideal is considerably 
closer to state capitalism than to socialism. With Saint-Simon, there is no talk of 
the abolition of private property, ol expropriations. Only up to a certain point 
does the state submit the activity of industrialists l:o the general plan. . . . 
Throughout his career Saint-Simon . . . was drawn to large-scale projects . . . , 
beginning with the plans for the Panama and Madrid canals and ending with plans 
to transform the planet into a paradise." V. Volgin, "Uher die historische Stellnng 
Saint-Simons," in Marx-Engels Archiv, vol. 1 (Frankfurt am Main), pp. 101-102, 
116. [U6,2] 

"Stocks have been 'democratized' so that all the world can share in the benefi ts of 
modern association. For it is under the banner of 'association' that people have 
glorified the accumulation of capital in joint-stock companies, over which grand 
financiers now exercise sovereignty at the expense of the shareholders." W. Lexis, 
Gewerkvereine unci U liter nehmerverbiincle in Frankreich (Leipzig, 1879), p. 143, 
cited in D. Rjazanov, "Zur Geschichte der ersten Internationale," in Marx-Engels 
Archiv, cd. D. Rjazanov, vol. 1 (Frankfurt am Main), p. 144. [U6,3] 



Emile Pereire, ex-Saint-Simonian, was the founder of Credit Mohilier. — Cheval- 
ier presents him, in La Religion Saint-Simonienne, as "a former student at the 
Ecole Polytechniqne." [U6,4] 

Re the history of newspapers. Differentiation according to social classes and mass 
circulation of literature, which, under Charles X, was mobilized against congre- 
gations. "Voltaire, more or less abridged, is adapted to the needs and circum- 
stances of all levels of society! There is the rich man's Voltaire, the 'Voltaire for 
owners of medium-sized property,' and the cottager's Voltaire. There are also 
editions of Tinrtujfe at three sous. There are reprints of . . . Holbach, . . . 
Duprais<?>, . . . Volney. Things are set up in such a way that . . . more than 



2,700,000 volumes were put into circulation in less than seven years." Pierre de la 
Gorce, La Restauration, vol. 2, Charles X (Paris), p. 58. [U6,5] 



Waiting for the Revelatear, who will bring on the end of the bourgeoisie and who 
"will render thanks to the father of the family for peacefully administering the 
Lord's estate." This, presumably, an allusion to Enfantin. At the beginning of the 
text, a sort of lament for the proletariat; the pamphlet also refers to this class in 
closing: "Emancipateur pacifique! Wc travels the world over, everywhere working 
for the liberation of the proletarian and of woman." The lament: "If ever you have 
visited our workshops, you have seen those chunks of molten iron which we 
draw from the furnaces and cast into the teeth of cylinders that turn more rapidly 
than the wind. These furnaces emit a liquid fire that, in its boiling and heaving, 
throws off a shower of glowing drops into the air; and from the teeth of the 
cylinder, iron emerges drastically reduced. We too, in truth, are hard pressed like 
diese masses of iron. If ever you have come to our workshops, you have seen 
those mining cables that are wound around a wheel, and that unwind in the 
search for blocks of stone or mountains of coal at a depth of twelve hundred feet. 
The wheel moans upon its axle; the cable stretches tight with the weight of its 
enormous charge. We, too, are drawn taut like the cable; but we do not moan like 
the wheel, for we are patient and strong. 'Great God! What have I done,' cries the 
voice of the people, consumed with a sorrow like that of King David. 'What have 
I done that my hardiest sons should become cannon fodder, and my loveliest 
daughters be sold into prostitution?' Michel Chevalier, "Religion Saint-Simo- 
nienne: Le Bourgeois, le revelateur" <pamphlet (Paris, 1830), pp. 3-4, i>. 

[U6a,l] 

Chevalier in 1848. He speaks of the forty-year sojourn of Israel in the wilderness, 
before it entered the Promised Land. "We, too, will have to pause for a time, 
before advancing into an era . . . of . . . prosperity for workers. Let us accept this 
season of waiting. . . . And if some persons endeavor to stir up the wrath of the 
populace ... on the pretext of hastening the advent of hetter times, . . . then let us 
emblazon the words that Benjamin Franklin, a worker who became a great 
man, . . . once spoke to his fellow citizens: 'If anyone says to you that you can come 
into wealth by some means other than industry and frugality, then pay him no 
heed: He's a viper."' Franklin, Conseils pour fairef ortune (Paris, 1848), pp. i-ii 
(preface by Michel Chevalier). 7 [U6a,2] 

The press under Charles X: "One of the members of the court, M. Sosthene de la 
Rochefoucault, . . . conceived the grand project of absorbing the opposition news- 
papers by buying them up. But the only ones that would consent to the deal had no 
influence to sell." Pierre de la Gorce, La Restauration, vol. 2, Charles X (Paris), 
p. 89. [U7,l] 

The Fourierists looked forward to mass conversions among the public after they 
introduced a feuilleton in La Phalange. See Ferrari, "Des Idees et de l'ecole de 
Fourier," Revue des deux mondes, 14, no. 3 (1845), p. 432. [U7,2] 



"O Poets! You have eyes, but you do not see — and ears, but you do not hear! 
Great things are unfolding in your midst, and you give us war chants!" [There 
follows a characterization of the warlike inspiration for "La Marseillaise."] "This 
hymn to blood, these frightful imprecations bear witness not to any danger that 
might be threatening the country, but to the impotence of liberal poetry — poetry 
without inspiration beyond that of war, struggle, and endless complaint. . . . O 
people! Sing, nonetheless, sing "La Marseillaise," since your poets are silent or 
can only recite a pale imitation of the hymn of your fathers. Sing! The harmony 
of your voices will yet prolong the joy with which triumph had filled your soul; 
for you, the days of happiness are few and far between! Sing! . . . "four joy is sweet 
to those in sympathy with you! It has been so long since they heard anything but 
moans and groans from your lips!" "Religion Saint -Simonienne: La Marseillaise" 
(extract from L'Organisateur, September 11, 1830) [according to the catalogue of 
the Bibliothe«[ue Nationale, the author is Michel Chevalier], pp. 3-4. The ani- 
mating idea of this rhapsody is the confrontation of the peaceful July Revolution 
with the bloody Revolution of 1789. Hence, this observation: "Three days of 
combat sufficed to overturn the throne of legitimacy and divine right. . . . Victory 
went to the people, who live from their labors — the rabble that crowds the 
workshops, the populace that slaves in misery, proletarians who have no prop- 
erty but their hands: it was the race of men so utterly despised by salon dandies 
and proper folk. And why? Because they sweat blood and tears to get their bread, 
and never strut about in the balcony of the Comic Opera. After forcing their way 
into the heart of the palace, . . . they pardoned their prisoners . . . ; they ban- 
daged the wounded. . . . Then they said to themselves : 'Oh, who will sing of our 
exploits? Who will tell of our glory and our hopes?"' ("La Marseillaise," as 
above, p. 1). [U7,3] 

From a reply to an unfriendly review (in La Revue de Pa-is) of Charles Pradier's 
literary labors: "For three years now, we have been appearing daily on the city's 
sidewalks, and you probably think we have grown accustomed to it all. . . . Well, 
you are mistaken. In fact, every time we step up on our soapbox, we hesitate and 
look around us for excuses; we find the weather unpropitious, the crowds inat- 
tentive, the street too loud. We dare not admit that we ourselves lack daring. . . . 
And now, perhaps, you understand . . . why sometimes we exult in the thought of 
our work; . . . and why, seeing us filled with enthusiasm, . . . you — and others 
with you — could take it for undue pride." Ch. Pradier, "Reponse a La Revue de 
Paris" in Le Boheme, Charles Pradier, editor-in-chief, vol. 1, no. 8 (June 10, 
1855). The passage is entirely characteristic of the bearing — at once honest and 
uncertain — of this newspaper, which did not make it past its initial year of publi- 
cation. As early as the first issue, it marks itself off from the lax, morally emanci- 
pated boheme and makes mention of the pious Hussite sect, the Freres Bohemes, 
founded by Michel Bradacz, which it would like to ensure a literary posterity. 

[U7a,l] 

Sample of the style of the newspaper Le Boheme: "What suffers cruelly in the 
garrets is intelligence, art, poetry, the soul! . . . For the soul is a wallet containing 



only the banknotes of paradise, and the shopkeepers of this world would nail this 
money to their counter like a coin fallen from the hands of a counterfeiter." Alex- 
andre Guerin, "Les Mansardes," Le Boheme, 1, no. 7 (May 13, 1855). [U7a,2] 

From a confrontation between the underclass intellectuals and the ruling-class 
intellectuals: "You princes of thought, jewels of the intellect . . . , since you have 
moved to disown us, we in turn have abjured your paternity; we have disdained 
your crowns and impugned your coats of arms. We have cast aside the grandiose 
titles you formerly sought for your labors: we are no longer "The Elan," "The 
Star," or "The Will-o'-the-Wisp," . . . but instead are "The Pretentious Fool," 
"The Penniless," "The Promised Land," "The Enfant Terrible," "The Tragic 
Pariah," or "The Bohemian," and thus we protest . . . your egotistical authority." 
Charles Pradier, "Peres et lils," Le Boheme, 1 , no. 5 (April 29,1855). [U7a,3] 

Le Boheme, in its first issue, bears the subtitle l\ onpolitical Newspaper. [U8,l] 

"Do me the kindness of walking through the gambling dens, the little restaurants 
near the Pantheon or the Medical School. There you will fi nd . . . poets who are 
moved only by envy and all the lowest passions, the self-proclaimed martyrs of the 
sacred cause of progress, who . . . smoke many a pipe . . . without doing any- 
thing . . . ; whereas Piconel, whose beautiful lines you have cited, Piconel the 
garment worker, who earns four and a half francs a day to feed eight people, is 
registered at the charity office!! ... I have no . . . wish, paradoxical as it might 
seem, to commend the boasting of Dumas pere or to excuse the indifference of 
some of his friends toward younger writers; but I declare to you that the greatest 
enemies of those who have been deprived of a literary legacy are not the writers of 
renown, the monopolizers of the daily feuilleton, but rather the falsely disinher- 
ited, those who do nothing but hurl insults, drink, and scandalize honest people, 
and all this from the vantage point of art." Eric Isoard, "Les Faux Boheines," Le 
Boheme, 1, no. 6 (May 6, 1855). [U8,2] 

It is significant that Le Boheme, which looks after the lights of the literary proletar- 
iat — who sympathize, to some extent, with the industrial proletariat — would see 
fit, in an article entitled "Du Roman en general et du romancier moderne en 
particulier" <On the Novel in General and the Modern Novelist in Particular), by 
Paul Saulnier (vol. 1, no. 5), to condemn the practice of "slavers." Monsieur de 
Santis, as the novelist in vogue is named here, returns home after a day spent in 
idleness. "Directly upon his arrival home, Monsieur de Santis locks himself in . . . 
and goes to open a little door hidden behind his bookcase. — He finds himself, 
then, in a sort of little study, dirty and quite poorly lit. Here, with a long goose 
quill in his hand, with his hair standing on end, is a man with a face at once 
sinister and unctuous. — Oho! with this one, you can tell from a mile away he's a 
novelist — even if he is only a former employee of the ministry who learned the 
art of Balzac from the serials in Le Constitutionnel. It is the veritable author of llie 
Chamber of Skulls !h is the novelist!" [U8,3] 



"In 1852 the brothers Pereire, two Portuguese Jews, founded the first great mod- 
ern bank, Credit Mobilier, of which one said that it was the biggest gambling hell in 
Europe. It undertook wild speculations in everything — railroads, hotels, colonies, 
canals, mines, theaters — and, after fifteen years, it declared total bankruptcy." 
Egon Friedell, Kulturgeschichte der Neuzeit, vol. 3 (Munich, 1931), p. 187. 

[U8a,l] 

"Boheme <bohemian> belongs to the vocabulary in use around 1840. In the lan- 
guage of that time, it is synonymous with 'artist' or 'student' or 'pleasure seeker'; 
it means someone who is light-hearted and unconcerned with the morrow, lazy and 
boisterous." Gabriel Guillemot, he Boheme (Paris, 1868), pp. 7-8; cited in Gisela 
Freund, <"La Photographie au point de vue sociologique," manuscript, > p. 60. 

[U8a,2] 

"The roman-f euilleton < serial novel > was inaugurated in France by he Siecle in 
1836. The beneficent effects of the roman-f euilleton on the newspaper's receipts is 
revealed by the contract which he Constitutionnel and La Presse together had 
with Alexandre Dumas in 1845. . . . Dumas received an annual salary of 63,000 
francs for five years, in return for a minimum output of eighteen installments per 
year." Lavisse, Histoire de la monarchic de juillet, vol. 4 (Paris, 1892); cited, 
without page reference, in Gisela Freund. [U8a,3] 

A saying of Murger's (cited by Gisela Freund, p. 63): "The boheme: it is the train- 
ing ground for the artistic life; it is the steppingstone to the Academie, to the 
Hotel-Dien < hospital > , or to the Morgue." [U8a,4] 

Gisela Freund (p. 64) underlines the difference hetween the first generation of 
hohemians — Gautier, Nerval, Nanteuil — who were often of solid hourgeois origin, 
and the second: "Murger was the son of a concierge-tailor; Champfleury was the 
son of a secretary in the town hall of Laon; Barhara, the son of a sheet-music 
seller; Bouvin, the son of a village policeman; Delvau, the son of a tanner in the 
Faubourg Saint-Marcel; and Courbet was the son of a quasi-peasant." To this 
second generation belonged Nadar — the son of a poor printer. (He was later, for a 
long time, secretary to Lesseps.) [U8a,5] 

"M. de Martignac bequeathed ... a troubled legacy to the newspapers, with his 
law of July 1828 — a law that was more liheral, to he sure, hut which, by making 
. . . dailies or periodicals more accessible to all, burdened them with certain finan- 
cial obligations. . . . 'What will we do to cover the new expenses?' demanded the 
newspapers. 'Well, you will run advertisements,' came the response. . . . The con- 
sequences of advertising were quick to emerge and seemingly endless. It was all 
very well to want to separate, in the pages of the newspaper, that which remained 
conscientious and independent from that which hecame partisan and mercenary; 
but the houndary . . . was quickly crossed. The advertisement served as bridge. 
How could one condemn, five minutes before, . . . what five minutes afterward 



proclaimed itself the wonder of the age? The fascination of capital letters, which 
were growing ever larger, carried advertising away: it was the magnetic mountain 
that threw off the compass. . . . This wretched advertising had an influence no less 
fatal to the hook trade. . . . Advertising represented ... a doubling of ex- 
penses . . . : one thousand francs for promoting a new work. Because of this rise in 
costs, moreover, hook dealers mercdessly demanded from authors two volumes 
instead of one — volumes in octavo rather than in smaller format, for that did not 
cost anymore to advertise. . . . Advertising . . . would require a whole history unto 
itself: Swift, with his vitriolic pen, would be the one to write it." On the word 
reclame < advertisement > , the following remark: "For those who may not know the 
facts, we merely observe that the reclame is the little notice slipped into the news- 
paper near the end, and ordinarily paid for by the bookseller; inserted on the 
same day as the advertisement, or on the day following, it gives in two words a 
brief and favorable judgment that helps prepare the way for that of the review." 
Saint-Beuve, "De la Litterature industrielle," Revue des deux mondes, 19, no. 4 
(1839), pp. 682-683. [U9,l] 

"Writing and publishing will be less and less a sign of distinction. In keeping with 
our electoral and industrial customs, everyone, at least once in his life, will have 
his page, his treatise, his prospectus, his toast — will be an author. From there to 
penning a feuilleton is only a step. ... In our own day, after all, who can say to 
himself that he does not, in part, write in order to live . . . ?" Sainte-Beuve, "De la 
Litterature industrielle," Revue des deux mondes, 19, no. 4> (1839), p. 681. 

[U9,2] 

In 1860 and 1868, in Marseilles and Paris, appeared the two volumes of Revues 
parisiennes: Les Journaux, les revues, les livres, by Baron Gaston de Flotte, who 
took it upon himself to combat the thoughtlessness and unscrupulousness of the 
historical accounts in the press and, particularly, in the feuilletons. The rectifica- 
tions concern the facts and the legends of cultural, literary, and political history. 

[U9.3] 

Fees for feuilletons went as high as two francs per line. Authors would often write 
as much dialogue as possible so as to henefitfrom the blank spaces in the lines. 

[U9a,l] 

In his essay, "De la Litterature industrielle" <On Industrial Literature) , Sainte- 
Beuve discusses, among other things, the initial proceedings of the newly organ- 
ized Societe des Gens de Lettres (which originally campaigned, above all, against 
unauthorized Belgian reprints). [U9a,2] 

"In the beginning, Senef elder had thought only of facilitating the reproduction of 
manuscripts, and he publicized the new processes leading to this end in his Voll- 
stcindigen Lehrbuch der Steindruckerei < Complete Manual of Lithography), 
which appeared in 1818. Others first exploited his ideas for the technique of lithog- 
raphy itself. These methods enabled a rapidity of drawing that was nearly equal to 



that of the word. . . . They opened the way to a journalism of the graver." Egon 
Friedell, Kulturgeschichte der Neuzeit, vol. 3 (Munich, 1931), p. 95. [U9a,3] 



Overview of the revolutionary press in Paris in 1848. Curiosites revolutionnaires: 
Les Journaux rouges — Histoire critique de tous les journaux ultra-re publicains, 
by a Girondist (Paris, 1848). [U9a,4] 

"There is only one way of preventing cholera, and that is to work to elevate the 
morality of the masses. No person whose moral constitution is satisfactory has 
anything to fear from the plague. . . . There is clearly a place, today, for awaken- 
ing moral salubrity among the masses. . . . What is needed are . . . extraordinary 
measures. . . . What is needed is a coup d'etat, an industrial coup d'etat. . . . This 
action would consist in changing, by decree, the law of expropriation, so that . . . 
the interminable delays occasioned by the current legislation would be reduced to 
a few days. . . . One could thus begin operations, for instance, on some thirty sites 
in Paris, from the Rue de Louvre to the Bastille, which would clean up and reform 
the worst neighborhood of the city. . . . One could . . . start up railways at the 
barrieres. . . . The first stage of construction . . . would be accompanied by cere- 
monies and public festivals. All the official hodies of the state would he there with 
their insignia, to exhort the people. The king and his family, the ministers, the 
council of state, the court of cassation, the royal court, what is left of the two 
Chambers — all would drop by on a regular basis, wielding the shovel and pick- 
axe. . . . Military regiments would arrive on the scene to do service in full dress, 
with their military music to inspire them. . . . Theatrical performances would be 
put on there from time to time, and the best actors would consider it an honor to 
appear. The most radiant women would mix with the workers to provide encour- 
agement. Exalted thus, and made to feel proud, the population would most cer- 
tainly hecome invulnerahle to cholera. Industry would he given an impetus; the 
government. . . would be . . .established on a firm foundation." Michel Chevalier, 
"Religion Saint-Simonienne: Fin du cholera par un coup d'etat" <pamphlet> 
(Paris, 1832). The Saint-Simonians wanted to distrihute medicine free of charge. 

[U9a,5] 

"What makes working on the omnihus train into truly painful drudgery: it departs 
Paris at 7 :00 in the morning and arrives in Strasbourg at midnight. This makes for 
seventeen hours of continuous service, during which the conductor must get off at 
every station, without exception, to open the doors of the cars! . . . Surely, the 
employee who is required to climh down at each station, and to wade around in the 
snow for five or six minutes every half-hour, so as to open and close the car 
doors — and all this at twelve degrees helow freezing, or worse — must suffer cru- 
elly." A. Granveau, UOitvrier devant la societe (Paris, 1868), pp. 27-28 ("Les 
Employes et le mouvement des chemins de fer"). [U10,1] 

A remarkable apotheosis of the traveler — to some extent a counterpart, in the 
realm of sheer banality, to Baudelaire's "Le Voyage" — can be found in Benjamin 
Gastineau, La Vie en chemin de J'er (Paris, 1861). The second chapter of the book 



is called "Le Vbyageur du XIX C siecle" <The Nineteenth-Century Traveler) 
(p. 65). This voytgeur is an apotheosis of the traveler in which, in quite peculiar 
fashion, the traits of the Wandering Jew are mingled with those of a pioneer of 
progress. Samples: "Everywhere along his path, the traveler has sown the riches 
of his heart and his imagination: giving a good word to all and sundry, . . . 
encouraging the laborer, rescuing the ignorant from their gutter, . . . and raising 
up the humiliated" (p. 78). "The woman who seeks a love supreme: traveler! — 
The man who seeks a devoted woman: traveler! — . . . Artists avid for new hori- 
zons: travelers! — The mad who take their hallucinations for reaJity: trav- 
elers! — . . . Glory hunters, troubadours of drought: travelers! — Life is a journey, 
and every single being who departs the womb of woman to return to the womb 
of earth is a traveler" (pp. 79-81). "Humanity, 'tis thou who art the eternal 
voyager" (p. 84). [U10.2] 

Passage from Benjamin Gastineau, ha Vie en chemin defer (Paris, 1861): "All of a 
sudden, the curtain is lowered abruptly on the sun, on heauty, on the thousand 
scenes of life and nature which your mind and heart have savored along the way. It 
is night and death and the cemetery; it is despotism — it is the tunnel! Nothing hut 
beings that dwell in the shadows, never knowing the hright wing of freedom and 
truth! . . . Nonetheless, after hearing the cries of confusion and dismay from pas- 
sengers on the train as it enters the gloomy archway, and their exclamations of joy 
on quitting the tunnel, . . . who would dare maintain that the human creature was 
not made for light and liberty?" (pp. 37-38). [U10.3] 

Passages from Benjamin Gastineau, La Vie en chemin defer (Paris, 1861): "Hail to 
you, nohle races of the future, scions of the railway!" (p. 112). "All aboard! All 
aboard! The whistle pierces the sonorous vault of the station" (p. 18). "Before the 
creation of the railroads, nature did not yet pulsate; it was a Sleeping Beauty. . . . 
The heavens themselves appeared immutable. The railroad animated every- 
thing. . . . The sky has hecome an active infinity, and nature a dynamie heauty. 
Christ is descended from his Cross; he has walked the earth, and he is leaving, far 
hehind him on the dusty road, the old Ahasuerus" (p. 50). [Ul0a,l] 

"Michel Chevalier delighted the students [of the Ecole Polytechnique] when he 
retraced, in particular, the great historical epochs, recurring often to Alexander, 
Caesar, Charlemagne, and Napoleon, in order to emphasize the role of inventors 
and triumphant organizers." G. Pinet, Histoire de I'Ecole polytechnique (Paris, 
1887), p. 205. [Ul0a,2] 

"The disciples of Saint-Simon — recruited, for the most part, from the Ecole des 
Mines, which is to say, from among the best students of the Ecole Polytechnique — 
could not have failed to exert a considerable influence on their younger com- 
rades. . . . Nevertheless, Saint-Simonianism did not have time to garner many 
converts at the Ecole Polytechnique. The schism of 1831" dealt it a fatal hlow — the 



folJies of Menilmontant, the bizarre costumes, and the ridiculous names had killed 
it." G. Pinet, Histoire de I'Ecole polytechnique, pp. 204-205. [U10a,3] 



The idea for the Suez Canal goes back to Enfantin, who had sought a concession 
from the viceroy of Egypt, Muhammad Ah, and wanted to move there with forty 
pupils. England made sure that the concession was denied him. [U10a,4] 

"Saint-Simon attempted to found an association to take advantage of the easy- 
terms mandated by the decree . . . of November 2, 1789, which made it possible 
to acquire national lands at a price that was payable in twelve annual installments 
by means of assignats. These terms allowed for the acquisition, with modest 
capital, of a considerable spread of rural properties. . . . 'Every financial specula- 
tion is based upon an investment of industry and an investment of funds. The 
returns on a financial speculation should be divided in such a way that industry 
and capital have shares proportionate to the influence they exercised. In the 
speculation I entered on with M. de Redern, capital played only a secondary 
role.'" The author cites a letter from Saint-Simon to Boissy-d'Anglas, dated No- 
vember 2, 1807; it contains indications as to his theory of the relations between 
capital, labor, and talent. Maxime Leroy, Les Speculations foncieres de Saint-Simon 
et ses querelles d'tiffaires avec son associe, le comte de Redern (Paris <1925>), pp. 2, 23. 

[U11.1] 



"Saint-Simon believed in science. . . .But whereas, at the beginning of his studies, 
the mathematical and physical sciences . . . had almost exclusive claim on his 
attention, it was now from the realms of the natural sciences that he would seek the 
elusive key to those social problems that so vexed him. 'I distanced myself, in 
1801, from the Ecole Polytechnique, 1 he writes, 'and I established myself in the 
vicinity of the Ecole de Medicine, where I was able to associate with the physiolo- 
gists.'" Maxime Leroy, La Vie veritable du comte Henri de Saint-Simon (Paris, 
1925), pp. 192-193. — The Ecole Polytechnique, at the time Saint-Simon lived 
near it, was housed in the Palais Bourbon. [UU,2] 



"The Nave of the Grand Cafe Parisien" reads the caption under an engraving 
from 1856. The view of the public offered here does, in fact, resemble the one 
seen in the nave of a church, or in an arcade. Visitors are mostly standing in place 
or wandering about — that is, among the billiard tables which are set up in the 
nave. [U11.3] 



Hubbard says — referring, with doubtful justification, to Saint-Simon's tears on 
parting from his wife at the time of their divorce: 9 "Perpetual sacrifice of the 
tender and compassionate being to the being that thinks and understands." 
Cited in Maxime Leroy, La Vie veritable du comte Henri de Saint-Simon (Paris, 
1925), p. 211. [U11.4] 



"Let us put an end to honors for Alexander; and hail Archimedes!" Saint-Simon, 
cited in Leroy, La Vie veritable du comte Henri de Saint-Simon, p. 220. [Ull,5] 

Comte worked for four years by the side of Saint-Simon. 10 [Ull,6] 

Eugene Sue's Juif errant < Wandering Jew> in he Constitutionnel as a replacement 
for Thiers's Histoire du Consulat et de V Empire, which Veron had originally 
planned to publish there. [Ull,7] 

Saint-Simon: "Considerations surles mesures a prendre pour terminer la Revolu- 
tion" < 1820> . — Introduction to Les Travaux scientijiques du XIX" siecle. 

[Ulla.l] 

Saint-Simon invented revolutionary playing cards: four geniuses (war, peace, art, 
commerce) as kings; four liberties (religion, marriage, the press, the professions) 
as queens; four equalities (duties, rights, dignities, colors) as jacks. Leroy, La Vie 
veritable du comte Henri de Saint-Simon (Paris, 1925), p. 174. [Ulla,2] 

Saint-Simon dies in May 1825. His last words: "We are carrying on with our 
work." Leroy, p. 328. [Ul la,3] 

On Saint-Simon: "As much as he astonishes us with his foresight in matters of 
labor and society, he nonetheless gives us the impression that he was lacking some- 
thing: ... a milieu, his milieu, the proper sphere in which to extend the optimistic 
tradition of the eighteenth century. Man of the future, he had to do his thinking 
almost entirely by himself, in a society that had been decapitated, bereft of its 
foremost minds by the Revolution. . . . Where was Lavoisier, founder of modern 
experimental science? Where was Condorcet, the leading philosopher of the age, 
and Chenier, the leading poet? They would have lived, in all likelihood, had 
Robespierre not had them guillotined. It was left to Saint-Simon to carry out, 
without their help, the difficult work of organization which they began. And faced 
with this immense and solitary mission, ... he took upon himself too many tasks; 
he was obliged to be at once the poet, the experimental scientist, and the philoso- 
pher of the newborn age." Maxime Leroy, La Vie veritable du ctmte Henri de 
Saint Simon (Paris, 1925), pp. 321-322. [Ulla,4] 

A lithograph by Pattel represents "Engraving Doing Battle with Lithography." 
The latter seems to be getting the upper hand. Cabinet des Estampes. [Ulla,5] 

A lithograph of 1842 depicts "The Divan of the Algerians in Paris" as "The Cafe 
Mauresque." In the background of a coffeehouse, in which exotic figures walk by 
the side of Europeans, three odalisqnes are sitting, pressed close together on a tiny 
divan beneath a mirror, and smoking water pipes. Cabinet des Estampes. 

[Ulla,6] 



Graphics from 1830 display readily, and often allegorically, the conflict of the 
newspapers among one another. They love to show, in this same period, what 



happens when several people have to share in reading one newspaper. They 
picture the struggle that arises on this occasion, whether it be over possession of 
the paper or over the opinions it purveys. Cabinet des Estampes, a plate from 
1817: "The Love of News, or Politicomania." [Ulla,7] 

"At the Stock Exchange, one Saint-Simonian is worth two Jews." "Paris-Bour- 
sier," Les Petits-Paris: Par les auteurs des memoires de Bilboquet [Taxile Delord] 
(Paris, 1854), p. 54. [U12,l] 

An uncommonly telling expression of the heyday of boulevard journalism. 
"What do you mean by the word 'wit'? — I mean something which, it is said, 
travels the streets but only very rarely enters the houses." Louis Lurine, Le 
Treizieme Arrondusement de Paris (Paris, 1850), p. 192. [U12,2] 

The idea that newspaper advertisements could be made to serve the distribution 
not only of books but of industrial articles stems from Dr. Veron, who by this 
means had such successes with his Pate de Regnauld, a cold remedy, that an 
investment of 17,000 francs yielded him a return of 100,000. "One can say, 
therefore, . . . that if it was a physician, Theophraste Renaudot, who invented 
journalism in France . . . , it was Dr. Veron who, nearly half a century ago, 
invented the fourth-page newspaper advertisement." Joseph d'Arcay, La Salle a 
manger du docteur Veron (Paris, 1868), p. 104. [U12,3] 

The "emancipation of the flesh," in Enfantin, should be compared to the theses 
of Feuerbach and the insights of Georg Biichner. The anthropological material- 
ism is comprised within the dialectical. [U12,4] 

Villemessant: "Initially, he ran a business inribhons. This concern . . . led the . . . 
young man to start up a fashion journal. . . . From there, Villemessant . . . soon 
moved into politics, rallied to the Legitimist party and, after the Revolution of 
1848, turned himself into a political satirist. He organized three different newspa- 
pers in succession, among them the Paris Chronicle, which was suppressed by 
imperial decree in 1852. Two years after this, hefounded Le Figaro." Egon Caesar 
Conte Corti, Der Zauberer von Homburg and Monte Carlo (Leipzig <1932>), 
pp. 238-239. [U12,5] 

Francois Blanc was one of the first great advertisers. Through contacts in the 
press, he had placed advertisements for the Homburg Casino in Le Siecle and 
L'Assemblee nationale. "He also personally arranged for entire series of eight- 
een — even lifty — advertisements to appear in newspapers . . . like La Presse, Le 
National, La Patrie, and Le Galignani." Egon Caesar Conte Corti, Der Zauberer 
von Homburg und Monte Carlo (Leipzig), p. 97. [U12,6] 



In Saint-Simon's day: "Independently of the New Jerusalem of Emanuel 
Swedenborg, advocated by Baron Portal, . . . there was the phalanstery of 
Charles Fourier. There was also the so-called Eglise Franchise of Abbe Chatel, 



Primate of the Gauls; there was the restoration of the Order of the Templars, 
organized by M. Fabre-Palaprat; and there was the cult of Evadamism created by 
theMapah." 11 Philibert Audehrand, Michel Chevalier < Paris, 1861 >, p. 4. 

[U12.7] 

Saint-Simonian propaganda. "One of the followers of the doctrine, who was 
asked, one day, what his duties were, replied: 'I am a man about town, a respected 
speaker. I am elegantly dressed so that I can be presented everywhere; gold is put 
into my pocket so that I am ready to play whist. How can I fail?'" Philihert 
Audebrand, Michel Chevalier, p. 6. [U12a,l] 

The split in the ranks of the Saint-Simonians forced adherents of the doctrine to 
choose between Bazard and Enf antin. [U12a,2] 

At Menilmontant, the members of the Saint-Simonian sect shared responsibility 
for the various departements of housekeeping: cooking (Simon and Rochette), 
tableware (Talebot), cleaning (d'Eicbtel, Lambert), shoeshine (Barrault). 

[U12a,3] 

The Saint-Simonians at Menilmontant: "A great musician of the future, 
M. Felicien David, composer of The Desert, of The Pearl of Brazil and of Hercu- 
laneum, was director of their orchestra. He composed the melodies they sang . . . , 
notably those which preceded and followed the meals." Philibert Audehrand, 
Michel Chevalier <Paris, 1861>, p. 11. [U12a,4] 

General celibacy, up until the marriage of Enf antin, was the rule at Menilmontant. 

[U12a,5] 

After the dissolution of Menilmontant, and after being sentenced to a year in 
prison, Chevalier was dispatched by Thiers to America. It is likewise Thiers who 
later sends him to England. After the February Revolution, which costs him his 
position, he becomes a reactionary. Under Napoleon, he is made senator. 

[U12a,6] 

By the end of the 1850s, he Siecle, with 36,000 subscribers, had the largest circu- 
lation. — Milland founds he Petit Journal, which he sells on the streets for one sou. 

[U12a,7] 

Balzac, commenting onAux Artistes: Du Passe et de Vavenir des beaux-arts — Doc- 
trine de Saint-Simon (Paris: Mesnier): "Apostleship is an artistic mission, hut the 
author of this pamphlet has not shown himself worthy of that august title. The 
main idea of his work is truly important; what he has given us is inconsider- 
able. . . . Saint-Simon was a remarkahle man, one who is yet to he understood. 
This fact has caused the leaders of his school to engage in the practice of prosely- 
tizing hy speaking, like Christ, a language attuned to the times and to the men of 
those times, a language calculated to appeal less to the mind than to the heart." In 



this same text, with reference to Saint-Simon: "There, perhaps, lies the truth." 
Honore de Balzac, Critique litteraire, ed. Louis Lumet (Paris, 1912), pp. 58, 60 



The immediate cause for the schism among the Saint-Simonians was Enfantin's 
doctrine of the emancipation of the flesh. To this was added the fact that others, 
like Pierre Leroux, had earlier already bridled at holding public confession. 



The press under Charles X: "The newspapers did not sell single copies to individu- 
als. Newspapers were read only by subscribers, and subscription was expensive. It 
was a luxury, in fact, reserved for the nobility and the haute hourgeoisie. The total 
numher of copies rose, in 1824, to only 56,000 (of which 41,000 were for the 
opposition newspapers)." Charles Seignohos, Histoire sincere de la nation 
franqaise (Paris, 1933), pp. 411-412. Over and above that, the newspapers had to 
pay large deposits. [U13,3] 

Girardin, as editor of La Presse, introduces advertisements, feuilletons, and sales 
of single copies. [U13.4] 

"Newspaper salesmen have great difficulty procuring their stock. In order to get 
their supply, they have to stand in line — in the street, no less! — for part of the 
night." Paris sous la Republique de 1848: Exposition de la Bibliotheque et des 
Travau.x historiques de la Ville de Paris (1909), p. 43. [U13,5] 

Around 1848, the Cafe Chantant opens up: The founder is Morel. [U13,6] 

Picture sheets: "Occupations of the Saint-Simonian Ladies According to Their 
Capacities" (Imagerie populaire, 1832). Colored prints, in which red, green, and 
yellow predominate: "Saint-Simonian Ladies Preaching the Doctrine," "This 
Bouquet Cannot Be Too Beautiful for Our Brother," "Saint Simonienne Dreaming 
of the Hunt," and so forth. Illustrations in Henry-Rene d'Allemagne, Les Saint- 
Simoniens, 1827—1837 (Paris, 1930), opposite p. 228. A pendant to this: "Func- 
tions of the Apostles of Menil-Montant According to Their Capacity" (illustration, 
ibid., opposite p. 392). See in this context (ibid., opposite p. 296) the etiquette for 
launching a food item: "Liquor of the Saint-Simonians." A group of Enfantin's 
disciples; at center, Enfantin and the Republic waving a tricolored flag. Everyone 
raises a glass. [U13,7] 



("Le Feuilleton des journaux politiques"). 



[U12a,8] 



[U13.1] 



The Saint-Simonians had little sympathy for democracy. 



[U13.2] 



In 1831, Bazard, Chevalier, and a few others refuse, as members of the "clergy" of 
the Saint-Simonian church, to serve in the Garde Nationale. Twenty-four hours' 
imprisonment. [U13,8] 



Le Globe (October 31, 1831), with regard to the uprising in Lyons, held that a raise 
in pay could place that city's industry in jeopardy: "Don't you see that, even if a 
direct intervention in the affairs of industry ... is required of you, . . . you can- 
not, for some brief period, alleviate the suffering of one class of society without 
perhaps oppressing another? Let us now commend the benefits of competition, of 
that laissez-faire . . . which the liberal orators of late have once again been tout- 
ing." H.-R. d'Allemagne, Les Saint-Simoniens (Paris, 1930), p. 140. [U13.9) 

The Saint-Simonians : a salvation army in the midst of the bourgeoisie. [U13a,l] 

Chevalier, writing to Hoart and Bruneau, on November 5, 1832: "Listen to that 
voice from Lyons! Lyons is calling you, is calling us, with a roar. Lyons is tottering. 
Lyons is trembling. What energy those proletarians have! They are descendants of 
Spartacus!" Henry-Rene d'Allemagne, Les Saint-Simoniens, 1827-1837 < Paris, 
1930>,p. 325. [U13a,2] 

Revealing: 

Ibis people, whose head and hand you fear, 
Must march, must march — no halting! 
It's when you stop their steps 
7bey notice die holes in their shoes. 

Leon Halevy, "La Chaussure," Fables nouvelles (Paris, 1855), p. 133; cited in de 
Liefde, Le Saint-Simonisme dans la poe'sie francaise <Haarlem, 1927), p. 70. 

[U13a,3] 



"Sappers of the army of peace" — a Saint-Simonian formula for the entire corps of 
workers. [U13a,4] 

A piece from Pierre Lachambeaudie's Fables et poesies diverses (Paris, 1851), 
"Fumee": smoke from the foundry meets with incense in the air, and they mingle 
at God's behest. This conception extends forward as far as Du Camp's poem on 
the locomotive, with its "sacred smoke." [U13a,5] 



Le Globe — at least for a time — was distributed gratis in Paris. [U13a,6] 

"The feminine and masculine element which they discover hi God, and which they 
aim to revive in the priestly marriage, has not heen celehrated in the poetry of the 
sect. We have found only one allusion to these doctrines . . . : 

God of male and female virtue. This world laeks all conviction; 
It yet doubts, and feels not the Father's iron affliction! 
The Mother — God above! — will be the saving grace 
That, in his joy, he'll hurry to embrace!" 



Jules Mercier, "Dieu nous le rendra," in La Foi nouvelle, p. 15; cited in C. L. de 
Liefde, Le Saint-Simonisme dans la poesiefranqaise <Haarlem, 1927>, pp. 146- 
147. [U13a,7] 



George Sand, for whom love entails the unification of the classes, understands the 
matter in this way: "A young man of humble station, but genial and good looking, 
marries a beautiful and perfect young noblewoman, and voila: the merger of the 
classes. . . . In Le Meunier d'Angiba.ult, Lemor, the artisan hero, refuses the hand 
of a patrician widow becanse she is rich . . . , and then the widow rejoices at the 
fire which brings about her ruin, removing thus the last obstacle in the way of 
union with her lover." Charles Brnn, Le Roman social en France au XIX" siecle 
(Paris, 1910) pp. 96-97. [U13a,8] 

Enfantin assumes that priests, artists, tradespeople, and so on will exhihit, in 
their different capacities, entirely different physical constitutions (and different 
ailments as well). [U13a,9] 

Girardin's style: "Indentation with each new sentence, each sentence being hut a 
line; the antithesis of ideas enveloped in the similitude of words; rhyme in 
prose . . . ; all nouns capitalized, enumerations that recall Rabelais, definitions 
that often recall nothing at all." Edouard Drumont, Les Heros et les piti es (Paris 
<1900>), p. 131 ("Emile de Girardin"). [U14.1] 

Drumont on Girardin: "To get this result — heing forgotten eight days after his 
death — he rose all his life at five o'clock in the morning." Edouard Drumont, Les 
Heros et les pitres (Paris < 1900>), p. 134-135 ("Emile de Girardin"). [Ul4,2] 

According to certain calculations, the Saint-Simonians distributed, hetween 1830 
and 1832, some 18 million printed pages among the population. See Ch. Benoist, 
"LTIomme de 1848," Revue des deux mondes (July 1, 1913). [U14,3] 

With their didactic contrast between worker bees and drones, the Saint-Simoni- 
ans hark back to Mandeville's fable of the bees. [U14.4] 

Regarding the movement within Saint-Simonianism: from the letters addressed to 
Lambert by Claire Demar and Perret Desessarts, hefore their joint suicide. Claire 
Demar: "But if his voice has not drawn me on, if it is not he who has come to invite 
me to this last festivity, at least I have not hastened his voyage: he has been ready 
for a long time." Desessarts: "The office and the officer are extinguishing them- 
selves at the same time, as we have often said they must; for the one cannot depart 
without the other! Alas, I, who have always heen a man of adversity and of soli- 
tude — I, who have always marched alone and apart, . . . protesting vigorously 
against order and unity — what could he surprising in my withdrawal, enacted at 
the very moment, it would seem, when the peoples are ahout to join in a religious 



federation, when their hands are now linked up to form that imposing chain. . . . 
Lambert, I do not doubt humanity, . . . nor do I doubt of Providence . . . ; but in 
the time in which we live, everything is sacred — even suicide! . . . Woe betide the 
man who does not bare his head before our cadavers , for he is truly impious! 
Adieu. August 3, 1833, at ten o'clock in the evening." Claire Demar, Ma Loi 
d'avenir, 12 work published posthumously by Suzanne (Paris: at the offices of La 
Tribune desfemmes, and in association with all marchands de nouveautes, 1834), 
pp. 8, 10-11. [U14,5] 

Statistics on the annual publication of newspapers, monthly periodicals, and fort- 
nightly reviews. Included are new publications only: 

1833: 251 joumaux 1838: 184 journaux 

1834: 180 11 1840: 146 

1835: 165 " 1841: 166 " 

1836:151 " 1842:214 

1837: 158 11 1845: 185 " 

Charles Louandre, "Statistique litteraire: De la Production intellectuelle en 
France depuis quinze ans," Revue des deux mondes (November 1, 1847), p. 442. 

[U14.6] 

Toussenel remarks of Enfantin that, in order to make up for his conviction in 
court, and to console himself for the failure of his fascination on this occasion, he 
turned to speculation. Toussenel provides, moreover, the following portrait of 
him: "There was among them a man of godlike comportment who was named 
Enfantin. He was no less celebrated for the puissant maneuvers of his cue stick, in 
the noble game of billiards, than for the frequency and decisiveness with which he 
doubled the stakes at gaming. Relying on the faith of several charming women, . . . 
he passed himself off as someone ideally suited to a leading role, and had himself 
proclaimed the Father. . . . And since it was the aftermath of the July Revolu- 
tion, . . . this man did not lack for followers." A. Toussenel, Les Juifs rois de 
Vepoqu.e, 3rd edition, ed. Gabriel de Gonet (Paris <1886>), vol. 1, p. 127. 

[Ul4a,l] 

At the time of the cholera epidemics <in 1832?>, people laid the blame for the 
infection on liquor dealers. [U14a,2] 

he Journal des debuts introduces the foreign correspondent: "Since M. Bertin sent 
Michel Chevalier on a diplomatic mission to the United States (which gained for his 
newspaper the publication of the famous Lettres sur VAmerique du Nord), the 
latter has acquired a taste for these governmentally sponsored assignments. . . . 
Following the Lettres sur VAmerique du Nord . . . came the Lettres sur VEspagne 
. . . ; then there had to he Lettres sur la Chine." A. Toussenel, Les Juifs roi de 
Vepoque (Paris), vol. 2, pp. 12-13. [Ul4a,3] 



The Saint-Simonians looked for a female messiah (La Mere), who was to marry 
with their high priest, Le Pere. [U14a,4] 



"Lepere Olinde <Rodrigues> : '. . . If you are a Saint-Simonian woman, be advised 
that it is not the republic that we want.'" Firmin Maillard, La Legende de la 
femme emanci pee (Paris), p. 111. [Ul4a,5] 

Heine dedicated Deutschland to Enfantin. Enfantin responded with a letter that 
was published in 1835, by Duguet, in a reprint, Heine a Prosper Enfantin, en 
Egypt, whose jackethore the lineDe VAllemagne. — 8" M. Piece 3319 <call numher 
ill the Bibliotheque Nationale>. The letter admonishes Heine to temper his sar- 
casm, above all in things religious. Heine should write books not about German 
thought but rather about the German reality, the heart of Germany — which, for 
Enfantin, was essentially an idyll. [U14a,6] 

The conversion of Julie Fanfernot to Saint-Simonianism (she turned later to 
Fourierism) was made the subject of a theatrical work by the Saint-Simonians. 
Extracts from this publication, wlrich appeared in the group's journal, are to be 
found in Firmin Maillard, La Legende de la.femme emancipee (Paris), pp. 115ff. 

[U15,l] 

Saint-Simon on the Rue Vivienne: "Dinners and evening parties followed one after 
another without interruption. . . . There were, in addition, some late-night scenes 
of amorous effusion, in wliich certain of the guests, it is reported, ... let them- 
selves be carried away in Anacreontic transports, while, from deep in his easy 
chair, a calm and impassive Saint-Simon looked on, taking no part at all in the 
conversation, hut nonetheless taking it all in, and preparing himself withal to 
transform the human race." Firmin Maillard, La Legende de la femme emancipee 
(Paris), p. 27. [U15.2] 

Many believed that the female messiah — who, according to Duveyrier, could issue 
as well from the ranks of the prostitutes as from any other stratum of society — 
would have to come from the Orient (Constantinople). Barrault and twelve com- 
rades, therefore, set out for Constantinople to look for "the Mother." [U15,3] 

Apropos of the schism among the Saint-Simonians: "Bazard . . . had been mortally 
wounded in consequence of the famous general confession, where he learned from 
his wife herself that, in spite of all the sympathy . . . which she had for him, she 
could never sec him come up to her without feeling an instinctive repugnance. It 
was 'Hercules enchained,' as someone had said on seeing him struck by apoplexy." 
Firmin Maillard, La Legende de lafemme emancipee (Paris), p. 35. [U15,4] 

"Everyone knows about the retreat at Menilmontant. . . . There they lived in celi- 
hacy so as to demonstrate that their ideas on marriage, and on the emancipation of 



women, were in no way the outcome of an epicurean design." Firmin Maillard, La 
Legende de lafemme emancipee (Paris), p. 40. [Ul5,5] 



Proudhon was a fierce opponent of Saint-Simonianism; he speaks of "Saint- 
Simonian rottenness." [U15.6] 

"The arts can nourish only as conditioned within an organic age <epoque or- 
ganique>, and inspiration is strong and salutary only when it is social and relig- 
ious." Thus E. Barrault speaks out, in Aux artistes: Du Passe et de Favenir des 
beaux-arts (Paris, 1830), p. 73, against the barren "critical ages." [U15,7] 

Last echo of the idea that inaugurated Saint-Simonianism: "One can compare the 
zeal and the ardor displayed by the civilized nations of today in their estab- 
lishment of railroads with that which, several centuries ago, went into the building 
of cathedrals. . . . If it is true, as we hear, that the word 'religion' comes from 
religare, "to bind" . . . , then the railroads have more to do with the religious spirit 
than one might suppose. There has never existed a more powerful instrument for 
. . . rallying the scattered populations." Michel Chevalier, "Chemins de fer," in 
Dictionnaire de I'economie politique (Paris, 1852), p. 20. [U15a,l] 

"The government wanted, on its own, to construct the railway system. There were 
various disadvantages to this course of action, . . . but, in the end, it would have 
given us railroads. The idea occasioned a terrific explosion; political rivalries 
dominated the scene. Science itself . . . came out in support of the spirit of system- 
atic opposition. An illustrious savant was vain enough to lend the authority of his 
name to the plot against the railways. Construction by the state was thus rejected 
by an overwhelming majority. This occurred in 1838. Favorably disposed, as it 
was, toward the project, the government now turned to private industry. Take 
these marvelous thoroughfares, it said; I am offering you the concession for them. 
And no sooner were these words out than a new storm arose. What! The bankers, 
the capitalists are going to reap a fortune from this venture! ... It is feudalism 
reborn from its own ashes! — The plans to offer concessions to companies were 
accordingly withdrawn, ... or else spiked with clauses that made acceptance im- 
possible for serious investors. We continued like this up until 1844." Michel 
Chevalier, "Chemins de fer," excerpt from Dictionnaire de Feconomie politique 
(Paris, 1852), p. 100. [U15a,2] 

Chevalier already sets up, for the transport of war materials in railroad cars, the 
equation: forty men equal six horses. See Michel Chevalier, "Chemins de fer," in 
Dictionnaire de I'economie politique (Paris, 1852), pp. 47-48. [U15a,3] 

Theory of art in Saint-Simonianism. It rests on the division of liistory "into Or- 
ganic or religious ages and Critical or irreligious ages. . . . The course of history 
treated in this work comprises two organic ages — the first constituted under the 
reign of Greek polytheism, the second under that of Christianity — and, in the 



wake of these organic ages, two critical ages, of which one extends from the era of 
Greek philosophy to the advent of Christianity, and the other from the end of the 
fifteenth century to the present." [E. Barrault,] Aux artistes: Du Passe et de 
Vavenir des beaux-arts (Paris, 1830), p. 6. <SeeN10,5.> [U15a,4] 

Universal history appears, to the Saint-Simonian Barrault, as the new work of 
art: "Shall we venture to compare the last of the tragic or comic authors of Rome 
with the Christian orators intoning their eloquent sermons? No, Corneille, Ra- 
cine, Voltaire, and Moliere will not come back to life; dramatic genius has accom- 
plished its mission. ... In the end, the novel will fail no less in respect of what it 
has in common with these two genres as in its relations to the history of which it 
is the counterfeit. . . . History, in fact, will again take on a powerful charm . . . ; it 
will no longer be only a little tribe of the Orient that will make for sacred history; 
the history of the entire world will merit this title. Such history will become a 
veritable epic, in which the story of every nation will constitute a canto and the 
story of every great man an episode." [E. Barrault,] Aux artistes: Du Passe et de 
I'avenir des beaux-arts (Paris, 1830), pp. 81-82. The epic belongs to the organic 
age; the novel and drama, to the critical. [U16,l] 

Barrault already has a vague idea of the importance, for art, of secularized cultic 
elements, although he puts the emphasis on periods that are consolidated 
through cult: "Although Greece never fostered a religious caste system like that of 
the Orient, its epic represented nothing less than an initial separation of poetry 
from cult. . . . Should orthodox movements survive into the critical periods, the 
course of these periods is imperceptibly drawn back into the bosom of ortho- 
doxy." [E. Barrault,] Aux artistes: Du Passe et de I'avenir des beaux-arts (Paris, 
1830), pp. 25-26. [U16.2] 

Saint-Simon points with satisfaction to the fact that precisely those men who 
benefited humanity most decisively — Luther, Bacon, Descartes — were given to 
passions. Luther, the pleasures of eating; Bacon, money, Descartes, women and 
gambling. See E. R. Curtius, Balzac <Bonn, 1923>, p. 117. [U16.3] 

With reference to Guizot, whose brochure, "Du Gouvernement de la France et 
du ministere actuel" (Paris, 1820) presents the accession of the bourgeoisie as the 
centuries-old struggle of a class (of course, his work De la Democratie [Paris, 1849] 
sees in the class struggle, which has meanwhile arisen between bourgeoisie and 
proletariat, only a misfortune), Plekhanov portrays the visions of the socialist 
Utopians as, "theoretically no less than practically," a great step backward. "The 
reason for this lay in the weak development of the proletariat at that time." 
Georgi Plekhanov, "Uber die Anfange der Lehre vom Klassenkampf," Die neue 
Zeil, 21, no. 1 (Stuttgart, 1903), p. 296. [U16,4] 

Augustin Thierry, an "adopted son" of Saint-Simon. According to Marx, he de- 
scribes very well how "from the first, or at least after the rise of the towns, the 



French bourgeoisie gains too much influence by constituting itself the Parliament, 
the bureaucracy, and so on, and not, as in England, merely through commerce 
and industry." Karl Marx to Friedrich Engels, London, July 27, 1854 [Karl Marx 
and Friedrich Engels, Ausgewiihlte Briefe, ed. V. Adoratski (Moscow and Lenin- 
grad, 1934), p. 60]. !;i [Ul6a,l] 

Aftereffects of Saint-Simonianism: "Pierre Leroux — who is represented, in en- 
gravings of the period, with hands clasped and eyes upraised in ecstasy — did his 
best to have an article on God published in La Revue des deux mondes. . . . We 
recall that Louis Blanc delighted Ruge with a lecture attacking the atheists. 
Quinet, along with Michelet, struggled furiously against the Jesuits, while pri- 
vately harboring the wish to reconcile his compatriots with the Gospel." C. Bougie, 
Chezles prophetes socialistes (Paris, 1918), pp. 161-162. [U16a,2] 

Heine's Deutschland is dedicated to Enf'antin. [U16a,3] 

Schlabrendorf reports that Saint-Simon wanted to make physics, and nothing but 
physics, the true religion. "Teachers of religion were supposed to deliver lectures 
in church on the mysteries and wonders of nature. There, I imagine, they would 
have set up electrical apparatus on the altar and stimulated the faithful with 
galvanic batteries." Graf Gustav von Schlabrendorf in Paris iiber Ereignisse und 
Personen seiner Zeit [in Carl Gustav Jochmann, Reliquien: Aus seinen nachgelas- 
senen Papier en, ed. Heinrich Zschokke, vol. 1 (Hechingen, 1836), p. 146]. 

[U16a,4] 

Enfantin hailed the coup d'etat of Louis Napoleon as the work of providence. 

[U16a,5] 

1846: enthusiastic reception, on its debut, of Felicien David's he Desert. The 
project of the Suez Canal was then the order of the day. "Its theme was a poet's 
eulogy of the desert as the image of eternity, coupled with his pity for the townsman 
imprisoned between stone walls." S. Kracauer, Jacques Offenbach und das Paris 
seiner Zeit (Amsterdam, 1937), p. 133." he Desert was parodied by Offenbach. 

[U16a,6] 

"Among the dream architecture of the Revolution, Ledoux's projects occupy a 
special position. . . . The cubic form of his "House of Peace" seems legitimate to 
him because the cube is the symbol of justice and stability, and, similarly, all the 
elementary forms would have appeared to him as intelligible signs of intrinsic 
moment. The ville naissante, the city in which an exalted . . . life would find its 
abode, will be circumscribed by the pure contour of an ellipse. . . . Concerning the 
house of the new tribunal, the Pacifere, he says in his Architecture: 'The building 
drawn up in my imagination should be as simple as the law that will be dispensed 
there."' Emil Kaufmann, Von Ledoux bis Le Corbusier: Ursprung und Entwick- 
lung der autonomen Architektur (Vienna and Leipzig, 1933), p. 32. [U17.1] 



Ledoux, Temple de Memoire (House of Women): "The narrative relief on the 
triumphal columns at four corners of a country house was intended to celebrate 
the glory of the hestowers of life, the mothers, in place of the customary monu- 
ments consecrated to the bloody victories of generals. With this unusual work, the 
artist wished to render thanks to the women he had come to know in his life." Emil 
Kaufmann, Von Ledoux bis he Corbusier (Vienna and Leipzig, 1933), p. 38. 

[U17.2] 

On Ledoux: "Once the distinctions of rank within architecture fall by the wayside, 
then all architectural orders are of equal value. . . . The earlier thematic eclecti- 
cism, which was taken up almost exclusively with churches, palaces, the 'better' 
domiciles, and of course military fortifications, retreats before the new architec- 
tural universalism. . . . The revolutionary process of the suhurbanizing of domes- 
tic housing parallels the disappearance of the baroque assemblage as art form. . . . 
A more extended complex, apparently conceived as a development at the entrance 
to the city, consists in a number of two- to four-room dwellings ranged around a 
square courtyard; each of these residences possesses the necessary closet space, 
while kitchen, pantries, and other utility rooms are located in a building at the 
center of the courtyard. We have here, probably, the earliest instance of the type 
of dwelling that is current today in the form of the apartment with shared 
kitchen." Emil Kaufmann, Von Ledoux bis Le Corbusier (Vienna and Leipzig, 
1933), p. 38. [U17.3] 

"The Orient had been discovered, and some journeyed there to seek the Mother — 
La Men; — a representative figure of this century, covered with breasts like the 
Diana of Ephesus." Adrienne Monnier, "La Gazette des Amis des Livres," La 
Gazette des Amis des Livres, 1 (January 1, 1938) (Paris), p. 14. [U17,4] 

"Mare remembers the Past; Woman divines the Future; the Couple sees the Pre- 
sent.' 1 '' Saint-Simonian formula, in Du Camp, Souvenirs litteraires, vol. 2 (Paris, 
1906), p. 93. [Ul7a,l] 

"La Mere": "She was to he lafemme libre. . . . This independent woman had to he 
a thinking woman, one who, . . . having fathomed the secrets of the feminine psy- 
che, . . . would make confession for all her sex. . . . The quest for . . . the Mother 
was not an innovation of Enfantin's; well hef ore him, Saint-Simon himself, during 
the period when Augustin Thierry was his secretary, had made an attempt to 
discover this . . . wonder . . . and evidently thought to have found her in Madame 
de Stael." The latter declined an invitation to beget a messiah for humanity with 
Saint-Simon (pp. 91-93). — "The niission to locate La Mere now formed, and was 
off. The pilgrims numbered twelve, including Barrault, the leader of the expedi- 
tion. Their ultimate destination was Constantinople, . . . though they had no 
money. Dressed in white (as a sign of the vow of chastity they had taken on leaving 
Paris), staffs in hand, they begged their way from place to place, in the name of the 
Mother. In Burgundy, they hired themselves out to help with the harvest; in Lyons, 



they arrived on the clay before an execution and, the following morning, demon- 
strated against the death penalty in front of the gallows. They embarked in Mar- 
seilles, and worked as sailors aboard a merchant vessel whose second mate was 
Garibaldi. . . . They slept in the Great Champ des Morts, L;> protected by cypresses 
from the morning dew; they wandered through the bazaars, occasionally stopping 
to preach the doctrines of Saint-Simon, speaking French to Turks who could not 
understand them" (pp. 94-95). They are arrested, then released. They set their 
sights on the island of Rotnma, in the South Pacific, as the place to seek the 
Mother, hut they get only as far as Odessa, whence they are sent back to Turkey. 
According to Maxime Du Camp, Souvenirs litteraires, vol. 2 (Paris, 1906). 

[U17a,2] 

"Gaudissart demanded an indemnity of five hundred francs for the week he had to 
spend in boning up on the doctrine of Saint-Simon, pointing out what efforts of 
memory and brain would be necessary to enable him to become thoroughly con- 
versant with this article." Gaudissart canvasses for he Globe (and he Journcd des 
enfants). H. de Balzac, Ulllustre Gaudissart, ed. Calmann-Levy (Paris), p. II. 1 * 

[U18.1] 

The Continental system 17 was, as it were, the first test for the example of Saint- 
Simonianism. Heine [Samtliche Werke [Hamburg, 1876], vol. 1, p. 155 — "Franzo- 
sische Zustande") calls Napoleon I a Saint-Simonian emperor. [U18.2] 

In the Saint-Simonian jacket that buttoned in back, we may discern an allusion to 
the androgynous ideal of the school. But it has to be assumed that for Enfantin 
himself it remained unconscious. [U18,3] 

Constantin Pecqueur, adversary of the Saint-Simonians , responds "to the ques- 
tion posed in 1838 by the Academie des Sciences Morales: 'How to assess . . . the 
influence of the . . . currently emerging means of transportation on . . . the state of 
a society ...?'" "The development of the railroads, at the same time that it in- 
duces travelers to fraternize in the cars, will overexcite . . . the productive activity 
of people." Pierre-Maxime Schuhl, Machinisme et philosophic (Paris, 1938), 
p. 67. [U18,4] 

The historical signature of the railroad may be found in the fact that it represents 
the first means of transport — and, until the big ocean liners, no doubt also the 
last — to form masses. The stage coach, the automobile, the aii-plane carry pas- 
sengers in small groups only. [U18.5] 



"The anemic pallor of our civilization, as monotonous as a railway line," says 
Balzac. La Peau de chagrin, ed. Flammarion (Paris), p. 45. 1I! [U18,6]