[Conspiracies, Compagnonnage] 



"Those agents provocateurs who, during the Second Empire, often mingled with 
rioters were known as 'white smocks.'" Daniel Halevy, Decadence de la liberte 



"In 1848, Louis Philippe had in Paris a security force of some 3,000 men, in place 
of the 950 gendarmes serving under Charles X, and some 1,500 police agents in 
place of 400. The Second Empire had great affection for the police, and it ar- 
ranged magnificent installations for them. They owe to the Second Empire that 
vast edifice — at once barracks, fortress, and office building — which occupies the 
center of the Cite between the Palais de Justice and Notre Dame, and which, 
although larger and less beautiful, recalls those palaces in Tuscan cities where the 
podestas resided." Daniel Halevy, Decadence de la liberte (Paris), p. 150. 



"The secret files in police headquarters inspire a certain awe and a certain dread. 
When a new police commissioner first takes office, his personal file is hrought up to 
him. He alone enjoys this privilege; neither the ministers nor even the president of 
the republic get to see their dossiers, which are shelved and maintained in archives 
that no one is permitted to examine." Daniel Halevy, Decadence de la liberte 



"Turning back toward the Quartier Latin, one ran into the virgin forest of the Rue 
d'Enfer, which extended between the Rue du Val-de-Grace and the Rue de l'Abbe- 
de-FEpee. There, one found the garden of an old hotel, abandoned and in ruins, 
where plane trees, sycamores, chestnut trees, and intertwined acacias grew hap- 
hazardly. In the center, a deep shaft gave access into the catacombs. It was said 
that the place was haunted. In reality, it served for the romantic gatherings of the 
Carbonari and of the secret society Aide-Toi, le Ciel t'Aidera <God Helps Him 
Who Helps Himself >." Dubech and d'Espezel, Histoire de Paris (Paris, 1926), 



(Paris <1931>), p. 152. 



[V1.1] 



[Vl,2] 



(Paris), pp. 171-172. 



[V1.3] 



p. 367. D Gardens, The Seine 0 



[V1.4] 



"The Garde Nationale was no laughing matter. Positioned between the royal 
troops and the popular insurgents, the armed bourgeoisie of Paris was the great 



mediating power, the good sense of the nation. . . . From 1830 to 1839, the bour- 
geois Garde Nationale lost 2,000 of their own in confrontation with the barricades, 
and it was due more to them than to the army that Louis Philippe was able to 
remain on his throne. . . . Whatever the reason — whether simple old age or a 
species of lassitude — it was always the bourgeoisie that wearied of this wasteful life 
which made it necessary, every six months, for hosiers and cabinetmakers to take 
up arms and shoot at each other. The hosiers, peaceful men, grew tired before the 
cabinetmakers. This remark would suffice to explain the February Revolution." 
Duhech and d'Espezel, Histoire de Paris, pp. 389-391. [VI, 5] 

June Insurrection. "It was enough to have the appearance of poverty to be treated 
like a criminal. In those days there was something called 'a profile of the insur- 
gent,' and anyone fitting the description was arrested. . . . The Garde Nationale 
itself had most certainly determined the outcome of the February Revolution, 1 but 
it never occurred even to them to give the name 'insurgents' to men struggling 
against a king. Only those who had risen up against property . . . were known as 
insurgents. Because the Garde Nationale . . . 'had saved society,' they could do at 
that time whatever they wanted, and no doctor would have dared refuse them 
entry into a hospital. . . . Indeed, the blind fury of the Guardsmen went so far that 
they would scream 'Silence!' to the fever patients speaking in delirium and would 
have murdered these people if the students had not stopped them." Engliinder 
<Geschichte der franzdsischenArbeitei-Associationen (Hamburg, 1864), > vol. 2, 
pp. 320,327-328, 327. [Vl,6] 



"It goes without saying that the worker associations lost ground with the coup 
d'etat of December 2, 1851. . . . All the associations of workers, those who had 
received subsidies from the government as well as the others, began by promptly 
removing their signs, on which symbols of equality and the words 'Liberty, Frater- 
nity, Equality' were inscribed; it was as though they had been shocked by the 
blood of the coup. Hence, with the coup d'etat, there were still unquestionably 
worker associations in Paris, but the workers no longer risked displaying this 
name. ... It would be difficult to trace the remaining associations, for it is not only 
on the signboards hut also in the city's directory of addresses that the name 
'Workers Association' is missing. Worker associations survive, after the coup 
d'etat, only in the guise of ordinary commercial concerns. Thus, the former fra- 
ternal association of masons is now going under the trade name 'Bouyer, Cohadon 
& Co.,' the association of gilders that likewise once existed as such now operates as 
the firm of 'Dreville, Thihout & Co.,' and, hy the same token, in every surviving 
association of workers it is the managers who give their names to the business. . . . 
Since the coup d'etat, not one of these associations has admitted a new memher; 
any new memher would he regarded with undisguised suspicion. If even the cus- 
tomers were each time received with distrust, this was because one everywhere 
sensed the presence of the police — and was the more justified in doing so as the 
police themselves would often show up officially on one pretext or another." Sig- 



mund Englantler, Geschichte der franzdsischen Arbeiter-Associationen (Ham- 
burg, 1864), vol. 4, pp. 195, 197-198, 200. [Vla,l] 



In regard to Cahet. "After the February Revolution, someone had discovered . . . , 
in the files of Toulouse's chief of police, a letter from Gouhenant, delegate or 
president of the first vanguard, who in 1843, during the trial in Toulouse, 2 had 
offered his services as police agent to the government of Louis Philippe. It was 
known that this poison of espionage in France had penetrated even into all the 
pores of family life; but that a police agent, this most disgusting excrescence of the 
old society, could have found his way to the leader of the vanguard of Icarians in 
order to cause his ruin, and at the risk of going under himself, aroused consider- 
able surprise. Hadn't police spies been seen in Paris fighting and dying on the 
barricades, doing hattle with the government in whose pay they stood!" Sigmund 
Englander, Geschichte der franzdsischen Arbeiter-Associationen, vol. 2, pp. 159- 
160. D Utopians 0 [Vla,2] 

"With the development of proletarian conspiracies, the need arose for a division of 
labor. The members were divided into occasional conspirators, conspirateurs 
d'occasion — that is, workers who engaged in conspiracy alongside their other em- 
ployment, merely attending meetings and holding themselves in readiness to ap- 
peal' at the place of assemhly at the leaders' command — and professional 
conspirators, who devoted all their energy to the conspiracy and made their living 
from it. . . . The social situation of this class determines its entire character from 
the outset. Proletarian conspiracy naturally affords them only very limited and 
uncertain means of subsistence. They are therefore constantly obliged to dip into 
the cash boxes of the conspiracy. A number of them also come into direct conflict 
with civil society as such, and appear before the police courts with a greater or 
lesser degree of dignity. Their precarious livelihood, dependent in individual cases 
more on chance than on their activity, their irregular lives whose only fixed ports- 
of -call are the taverns of the marchands de vin (the conspirators' places of rendez- 
vous), their inevitable acquaintance with all kinds of dubious people, place them 
in that social category which in Paris is known as the boheme. These democratic 
hohemians of proletarian origin are therefore either workers who have given up 
their work and have as a consequence become dissolute, or characters who have 
emerged from the lumpenproletariat and bring all the dissolute habits of that class 
with them into their new way oflife. . . . The whole way of life of these professional 
conspirators has a most decidedly hohemian character. Recruiting sergeants for 
the conspiracy, they go from marchand de vin to marchand de vin, feeling the 
pulse of the workers, seeking out their men, cajoling them into the conspiracy and 
getting either the society's treasury or their new friends to foot the bill for the liters 
inevitably consumed in the process. Indeed, it is really the marchand de vin who 
provides a roof over their heads. It is with him that the conspirator spends most of 
his time; it is here he has his rendezvous with his colleagues, with the members of 
his section and with prospective recruits; it is here, finally, that the secret meetings 
of sections (groups) and section leaders take place. The conspirator, highly san- 



guine in character anyway like all Parisian proletarians, soon develops into an 
absolute bmmbocheur <hoozer> in this continual tavern atmosphere. The sinister 
conspirator, who in secret session exhibits a Spartan self-discipline, suddenly 
thaws and is transformed into a tavern regular whom everybody knows and who 
really understands how to enjoy his wine and women. This conviviality is further 
intensified hy the constant dangers the conspirator is exposed to; at any moment 
he may he called to the barricades, where he may be killed; at every turn the police 
set snares for him which may deliver him to prison or even to the galleys. ... At 
the same time, familiarity with danger makes him utterly indifferent to life and 
liberty. He is as at home in prison as in the wine shop. He is ready for the call to 
action any day. The desperate recldessness which is exhibited in every insurrec- 
tion in Paris is introduced precisely by these veteran professional conspirators, 
the homines de coups de main. They are the ones who throw up and command the 
first barricades, who organize resistance, lead the looting of weapon-shops and the 
seizure of arms and ammunition from houses, and in the midst of the uprising 
carry out those daring raids which so often throw the government party into 
confusion. In a word, they are the officers of the insurrection. It need scarcely be 
added that these conspirators do not confine themselves to the general organizing 
of the revolutionary proletariat. It is precisely their business to anticipate the 
process of revolutionary development, to hring it artificially to the crisis point, to 
launch a revolution on the spur of the moment, without the conditions for a revo- 
lution. For them, the only condition for revolution is the adequate preparation of 
their conspiracy. They are the alchemists of the revolution, and are characterized 
by exactly the same chaotic thinking and blinkered ohsessions as the alchemists of 
old. They leap at inventions which are supposed to work revolutionary miracles: 
incendiary hombs, destructive devices of magic effect, revolts which are expected 
to be all the more miraculous and astonishing in effect as t heir basis is less ra- 
tional. Occupied with such scheming, they have no other purpose than the most 
immediate one of overthrowing the existing government, and they have the pro- 
foundest contempt for the more theoretical enlightenment of the proletariat ahout 
their class interests. Hence their pleheian rather than proletarian irritation at the 
habits noirs ("hlack frock coats") — people of a greater or lesser degree of educa- 
tion who represent that aspect of the movement, hut from whom they can never 
make themselves quite independent, since they are the official representatives of 
the party. The habits noirs also serve, at times, as their source of money. It goes 
without saying that the conspirators are ohliged to follow willy-nilly the develop- 
ment of the revolutionary party. . . . The chief characteristic of the conspirators' 
way of life is their hattle with the police, to whom they have precisely the same 
relationship as thieves and prostitutes." At another point in this article, we read 
(in reference to Chenu's report on Lucien de La Hodde that follows): "As we see, 
this spy . . . turns out to be a political prostitute of the vilest kind who hangs ahout 
in the street in the rain for the payment of his 'tip' hy the first officer of the peace 
who happens to come along." '"On one of my nocturnal excursions,' recounts 
Chenu, 'I noticed de La Hodde walking up and down the Quai Voltaire. ... It was 
raining in torrents, a circumstance which set me thinking. Was this dear fellow de 



La Hodde also helping himself from the cash box of the secret funds, by any 
chance? . . . "Good evening, de La Hodde, what on earth are you up to here at this 
hour and in this fearful weather?" "I am waiting for a rascal who owes me some 
money, and since he passes this way every evening at this time, he is going to pay 
me, or else" — and he struck the parapet of the embankment violently with his 
stick.' De La Hodde attempts to get rid of him and walks toward the Pont du 
Carrousel. Chenu departs in the opposite direction, but only to conceal himself 
under the arcades of the Institut <de Franco. ... 'A quarter of an hour later, I 
noticed the carriage with two little green lamps. ... A man got out; de La Hodde 
went straight up to him. They talked for a moment, and I saw de La Hodde make a 
movement as though putting money into his pocket. "' Marx and Engels, review of 
Chenu, Les Conspirateurs (Paris, 1850) and de La Hodde, La Naissance de la 
Republique (Paris, 1850), published in the Neuen rheinischen Zeitung <1850>, 
rpt. in <Die neue Zeit,> 4 (Stuttgart, 1886), pp. 555-556, 552, 551/' [V2;V2a] 

The workers of 1848 and the great Revolution: "Although the workers suffered 
under the conditions created by the Revolution, they did not blame it for their 
misery; they imagined that the Revolution had failed to bring about the happiness 
of the masses because intriguers had perverted its founding principle. According 
to their thinking, the great Revolution was good in itself, and human misery could 
be eliminated only if people were to resolve on a new 1793. Hence, they turned 
away distrustfully from the socialists and felt drawn to the bourgeois republicans, 
who conspired with the aim of establishing a republic by revolutionary means. The 
secret societies in existence during the reign of Louis Philippe recruited a great 
many of their most active members from the working class." Paul Laf argue, "Der 
Klassenkampf in Frankreich," Die neue Zeit, 12, no. 2 (1894), p. 615. [V3,l] 

Marx on the "Communist League": "'As far as the secret doctrine of the League is 
concerned, it underwent all the transformations of French and English socialism 
and communism, as well as their German versions. . . . The secret form of the 
society goes back to its Paris origins. . . . During my first, stay in Paris (from late 
October 1843 to February 1845), I established personal contact with the leaders of 
the League living there, as well as with the leaders of the majority of the secret 
French worker associations — without, however, becoming a member of any of 
them. In Brussels, . . . the London Central Authority entered into correspondence 
with us and . . . sent ... a watchmaker called Joseph Moll ... to invite us to join 
the League. Moll allayed our doubts ... by revealing that the Central Authority 
intended to convoke a Congress of the League in London. . . . Accordingly, we 
joined it. The Congress . . . took place, and, after heated debate over several 
weeks, it adopted the Manifesto of the Communist Party, written by Engels and 
myself.' At the time Marx wrote these lines, he described their content as compris- 
ing 'histories long past and half forgotten.' ... In 1860 the workers' movement, 
suppressed by the counterrevolution of the 1850s, was dormant throughout 
Europe. . . . One misunderstands the history of the Communist Manifesto if one 
sees the date of its publication as marking the commencement of the European 



workers' movement. In point of fact, the manifesto represented the close of this 
movement's first period, which stretched from the July Revolution to the Febru- 
ary Revolution. . . . The most they could attain was theoretical clarification. ... A 
secret league of workers that, over the years, could accompany and intellectually 
stimulate the English and French socialism of the day, as well as the reigning 
German philosophy, will have displayed an energy of thought that deserves the 
highest respect." "Ein Gedenktag des Kommunismus," Die neue Zeit, 16, no. 1 
(Stuttgart, 1898), pp. 354—355. The passage from Marx is taken from the polemi- 
cal pamphlet against Vogt. 4 [V3,2] 

"The practical programs of the communist conspirators of the period . . . set them 
apart advantageously from the socialist Utopians, thanks to the firm conviction 
that the emancipation of the working class ('the people') is unthinkable without 
struggle against the upper classes ('the aristocracy'). Of course, the struggle of a 
handful of men who have hatched a conspiracy in the name of popular interests 
can in no case be considered a class struggle. If, nevertheless, the majority of these 
conspirators have come from the working class, then the conspiracy can be said to 
constitute the germ of the revolutionary struggle of that class. And the conception 
which the Society of Seasons'' has of the 'aristocracy' shows how closely the ideas 
of the revolutionary communists in France, at that time, were connected to the 
ideas of the bourgeois revolutionaries of the eighteenth century and the liberal 
opposition during the Restoration. . . . Like Augustin Thierry, the French revolu- 
tionary communists began with the idea that the struggle against the aristocracy 
was necessarily in the interests of all the rest of society. But they rightly point out 
that the aristocracy of birth has heen replaced by an aristocracy of money, and 
that, as a result, the struggle . . . must be waged against the bourgeoisie." Georgi 
Plekhanov, "Uber die Anfange der Lehre vom Klassenkampf" (from the introduc- 
tion to a Russian edition of the Communist Manifesto), part 3 , "Die Anschauungen 
des vormarxistischen Sozialismus vom Kassenkampf," Die neue Zeit, 21, no. 1 



1851: " A decree of December 8 authorized the deportation, without hearing, . . . 
of any person presently or formerly belonging to a secret society. This was under- 
stood as referring to any society at all, whether a society for mutual aid or a 
literary society, that met — even in broad daylight — without the express permis- 
sion of the prefect of police." A. Malet and P. Grillet, XIX" Siecle (Paris, 1919), 



"Following the assassination attempt by Orsini . . . , the imperial government im- 
mediately voted into law a general security measure giving it the power to arrest 
and deport, without hearing, ... all persons previously punished on the occasion 
of the June Days of 1848 and the events of December 1851 .... The prefect of each 
depurtement was ordered to designate immediately a specific number of victims." 



(1903), p. 297. 



[V3a,l] 



p. 264. 



[V3a,2] 



A. Malet and P. Grillet, XIX" Siecle (Paris, 1919), p. 273. 



[V3a,3] 



"The Independents had their secret society, the Charbonnerie <Carbonari>, or- 
ganized at the beginning of 1821 on the model of the Italian Carbonari. The 
organizers were a wine merchant, Dugied, who had spent time in Naples, and a 
medical student, Bazard. . . . Every member was required to contribute one franc 
a month, to possess a gun and fifty bullets, and to swear to carry out blindly the 
orders of his superiors. The Charbonnerie recruited among students and soldiers 
in particular; it ended up numbering 2,000 sections and 40,000 adherents. The 
Charbonniers wanted to overthrow the Bourbons, who had been 'brought back 
by foreigners,' and 'to restore to the nation the free exercise of its right to choose 
a suitable government.' They organized nine plots during the first six months of 
1822; all failed." A. Malet and P. Grille:, XIX Steele (Paris, 1919), p. 29. The 
uprisings of the Carbonari were military revolts; they had, perhaps, a certain 
analogy to those of the Decembrists. [V4,l] 

April 29, 1827: dissolution of the Garde Nationale by order of Villele, on account 
of a demonstration which it had organized against him. [V4,2] 

About sixty students from the Ecole Polytechnique at the head of the July Revolu- 
tion. [V4,3] 

March 25, 1831: reinstatement of the Garde Nationale. "It named its own officers, 
except for the military chiefs. . . . The Garde Nationale constituted ... a veritable 
army, numbering some 24,000 men . . . ; this army was a police force. . . . Also, 
care was taken to separate out the workers. . . . This was achieved by requiring 
the Garde Nationale to wear uniforms and to pay its own expenses. . . . This bour- 
geois guard, moreover, did its duty bravely in all circumstances. As soon as the 
drums had sounded the call, each man would leave his place of work, while the 
shopkeepers closed their stores, and, dressed in uniform, they would all go out to 
join their battalion, not needing to muster." A. Malet and P. Grillet, XIX" Siecle 
(Paris, 1919), p. 77, 79. [V4,4] 

"The republicans had belonged, for the most part, to the Charbonnerie; against 
Louis Philippe, they multiplied the number of secret societies. The most important 
. . . was that of the Droits de l'Homme < Rights of Man>. Founded in Paris (where 
it quickly grew to nearly 4,000 members), and modeled on the Charbonnerie, it 
had branches in most of the major cities. It was this secret society that organized 
the great insurrections in Paris and Lyons in June 1832 and April 1834. The 
principal republican newspapers were La Tribune and he National, the first di- 
rected by Armand Marrast and the second by Armand Carrel." Malet and Grillet, 
XIX" Siecle (Paris, 1919), p. 81. [V4,5] 

Declaration of December 19, 1830, issued by students at the Ecole Polytechnique 
to the editorial office of Le Constitutionnel: "'If any man among the agitators,' they 
say, 'is found wearing the uniform of the Ecole, that man is an impostor. . . . ' And 
so they had these men tracked down wherever they appeared in the faubourgs in 



the uniform of Polytechnicians, seeking to usurp the latter's influence. The best 
way to recognize them, according to Bosquet, was to ask them the differential of 
sine x or of log x; 'if they respond appropriately, they are former students; if not, 
we have them jailed.'" G. Pinet, Hutoire de I'Ecole polytechnique (Paris, 1887), 
p. 187. Disturbances took place in connection with the trial against the ministers 
of Charles X. 6 Pinet adds: "In supporting the interests of the bourgeoisie, those 
with republican convictions seemed to fear they would be accused of deserting 
the cause of the people" (p. 187). In a further proclamation, the school came out 
decisively in favor of universal suffrage. [ V4a,l] 

"The students go to their student societies, whether publicly or secretly organized, 
to get the watchword of the day. . . . There, they learn what actions are being 
planned. . . . With all this going on, the Ecole Polytechnique has begun to view 
itself as a fourth estate within the nation. ... It was the moment when the Repub- 
lican party, which counted in its ranks the artillery of the Garde Nationale, the 
student, the proletariat, the worker, and the veteran of July, resumed ... its 
activity; the moment when popular societies — like Les Amis du Peuple, Les Droits 
de 1' Homme, and La Gauloise — were recruiting heavily; the moment when the 
Garde Nationale failed to maintain the peace; when the Saint-Simonians threat- 
ened to unsettle the order of society; . . . and when . . .he National and La Trib- 
une waged a daily struggle against those in power." G. Pinet, Histoire de I'Ecole 
polytechnique (Paris, 1887), pp. 192-193. [V4a,2] 

During the cholera epidemic, the government was accused of having poisoned the 
fountains. For example, in the Faubourg Saint- Antoine. [V4a,3] 

"Young people in the schools had adopted the red beret; and members of the secret 
societies looked forward to the next time, when the national razor would be well 
honed." Charles Louandre, Les Idees subversives de notre temps (Paris, 1872), 
p. 85. [V4a,4] 

The secret societies of the democrats were chauvinistic. They wanted interna- 
tional propaganda for the republic by means of war. [ V5 , 1 ] 

"Response afterward made by a prisoner before the Court of Peers: / 'Who was 
your chief?' / 'I knew none, and I recognized none. '" Victor Hugo, Oeuvres com- 
pletes, novels, vol. 8 (Paris, 1881), p. 47 (Les Miserables, "Faits d'ou l'histoire 
sort et que l'histoire ignore"). 7 [V5,2] 

"From time to time, men 'disguised as bourgeois, and in fine coats' came, 'causing 
embarrassment,' and, having the air 'of command,' gave a grip of the hand to the 
most important, and went away. They never stayed more than ten minutes." Vic- 
tor Hugo, Oeuvres completes, novels, vol. 8 (Paris, 1881), pp. 42-43 (Les 
Miserables, "Faits d'oii l'histoire sort et que l'histoire ignore")." [V5,3] 



The Societe cles Droits cle l'Homme < Society of the Rights of Man) employs, in its 
pamphlets, the calendar of the great Revolution. In the month of Pluviose," year 
42 of the Republican era, it counts 300 branch establishments throughout France, 
163 in Paris alone, of which every one had its particular name. The wooing of the 
proletarians by the bourgeoisie had the benefit "that, instead of enlisting them 
through humiliation or material services, through the offer of money or other 
forms of assistance, it was by various attentions and tokens of respect, by joining 
together in balls and fetes, that the leaders of the bourgeoisie worked to form 
attachments with the workers." Charles Benoist, "L'Homme de 1848," part 1, 
Revue des deux mondes (July 1, 1913), pp. 148-149. [V5,4] 

The Societe de Propagande <Society of Propaganda): "To this organization we 
owe, in part, the strike at the end of 1833, which extended to typographers, me- 
chanics, stonecutters, rope makers, hackney drivers, camberers, glovers, saw- 
yers, wallpaperers, hosiers, and locksmiths, and which involved no less than 
'8,000 tailors, 6,000 shoemakers, 5,000 carpenters, 4,000 jewelers, and 3,000 
bakers.'" Ch. Benoist, "L'Homme de 1848," part 1, Revue des deux mondes (July 
1,1913), p. 151. [V5,5] 

The Comite Invisible < Invisible Committee) — name of a secret society in Lyons. 

[V5,6] 

Ouly after 1832, but above all around 1834 and 1835, did revolutionary propa- 
ganda gain a foothold in the proletariat. [V5,7] 

In the tightened organization of the secret societies after 1835, the mystagogic 
element was intensified. The names of the days of the week and of the months 
became codewords for assault detachments and commandos. An initiation cere- 
mony influenced by freemasonry and reminiscent of the Vehme <medieval crimi- 
nal tribunals) was introduced. According to de La Hodde, this ceremonial 
already includes, among other things, the t[uestion: "Must one make a political 
revolution, or a social revolution?" 10 See Ch. Benoist, "L'Homme de 1848," part 
1, Revue des Deux Mondes, 7, no. 1 (1913), pp. 1959-1961. [V5,8] 

"It was all up with the Jacobins by 1840, just as with the Montagnards, the secret 
societies, the conspiracies, the journals, the ceremonial parades, and the raids. 
The 'communists' now held center stage. . . . The workers took part in the ban- 
quet in Belleville, at wliich the clockmaker Simard gave a speech. The great strike 
of 1840, during which, in Paris alone, 30,000 men stopped work, tightened their 
federation. . . . Heinrich Heine has given us, in ten passages of his Lutece, a vivid 
picture of . . . the powerful hold which communism had on the workers from the 
Paris suburbs. Heine had the honor, in his letters to the Augsburg Gazette, of 
unveiling communism to the communists. . . . But . . . there are communists and 
communists. I transcribe, from L'Almanach Icarien of 1843, this notice . . . : 
'Today, the communists can be divided into two main categories: communists pure 



and simple, . . . who want to abolish marriage and the family, and Icarian commu- 
nists, . . . who wish to preserve the family and marriage, hut would do away with 
secret societies, wanton violence, riots, and other such felonies." Charles Benoist, 
"L'Homme de 1848," part 2, Revue des deux mondes (February 1, 1914), 
pp. 638-641. [V5a,l] 

In the mid-Thirties, a crisis broke out in the traditions of the journeymen and 
traveling artisans. The hierarchies handed down from the time of the guilds 
began to lose their authority; many of the work songs had come to seem old-fash- 
ioned. An effort was made to elevate the intellectual and moral level of the 
associations. Agricol Perdiguier put together a sort of journeyman's primer, with 
songs and didactic or devotional readings. This document shows that the mori- 
bund customs of the trade guilds were a breeding ground for secret societies. 

[V5a,2] 

Cenacles after 1839: La Goguette des Fils du Diable < Revels of the Sons of Satan >, 
Les Communistes Materialistes <The Materialist Communists). [V5a,3] 



Network of wine merchants: "The current law gives them freedom, whereas the 
Empire, in point of fact, had deprived them of freedom. Napoleon III looked on 
the taverns as 'meeting places for the secret societies,' and the Code annote [a 
pamphlet by Julien Goujon, Code annote des limonadiers] accuses him of having 
wanted to 'strike with terror,' in order to 'transform three hundred thousand 
inhabitants and their families into official watchmen.' Three hundred thousand 
taverns — that is, political taverns (what Balzac calls 'the people's parliament') — 
were thus consolidated . . . under the July Monarchy and the government of 
1848." Maurice Talmeyr, "LeMarchand de vins," Revue des deux mondes (August 
15, 1898), pp. 877-878. [V5a,4] 

Varia from Agricol Perdiguier, he Livre du compagnonnage (Paris: by the author, 
1840): "In 1830, the Aspirants Menuisiers <Apprentice Joiners) and the Aspirants 
Serruriers <Apprentice Locksmiths) in Bordeaux revolted against their fellow 
compagnons, or tradesmen, and formed among themselves the core of a new soci- 
ety. Since then, in Lyons, Marseilles, and Nantes, other apprentices have revolted 
and formed societies. . . . These various societies corresponded with one another, 
and the Societe de l'Union ou des Independants was horn. ... It is distinguished 
by no mystery, no initiation, no hierarchy. . . . All members of this society are 
equal" (pp. 179-180). Customs: "When a compagnon goes to the house where the 
society lodges, eats, and congregates, he says: 'I am going to the Mother's house'" 
(pp. 180-181). Names: "The Rose of Carcassonne, the Resolved of Tournus, and 
many others" (p. 185). Greeting — a prescribed form of introduction for trade- 
guild members on first meeting: "They ask one another what side they are on or 
what allegiance they hold to. If it is the same, there is a fete, and they drink from a 
shared flask. . . . If not, there are insults to start with, and then blows" (p. 187). 
Variously colored ribbons, worn in different ways, are insignia of the individual 



trades. Common, as well, are earrings with distinctive little pendants on them 2 
(horseshoes, hammers, standard gauges, and the like), to which the different 
trades lay exclusive claim. "The T-square and compass are emhlems of all the ^ 
trade guilds, all compagnonnage, for it is thought . . . that the word compagnon q 
derives from compas <compass>. u . . . The shoemakers and bakers have several g 
times paid dearly for the honor of wearing the compass; all the compagnons with 
allegiance to other professions set upon them" (p. 189). "In the trade-guild socie- 
ties, the word monsieur is never used. . . . The French, Spanish, Italians, and 
Swiss, whenever they happen to meet, address one another as countries — Country >3 
of Spain, Country of Italy, Country of Switzerland, and so on. . . . Since they all o| 
reside under the same starry vault, and tread the same ground, they are — and g 
they call themselves — countries; the world for them, is one great country!" ^ 
(p. 41). — Perdiguier was on the staff of L'Atelier (1840-1850), founded by 
Buchez. It went under in 1850 hecause it could not make a bail payment of 18,000 
francs. [V6,l] 

The July Days brought about an upsurge in secret societies, in consequence of a 
rapprochement between the republican bourgeoisie and the proletariat. [V6,2] 

The Society of the Tenth of Decemher. "On the pretext of establishing a charitable 
association, Louis Napoleon divided the Parisian lumpenproletariat, after his 
election to the presidency, into numerous secret sections, which were headed by 
Bonapartist agents." Eduard Fuchs, Die Karikatur der europciischen Volker (Mu- 
nich <1921>), vol. 2, p. 102. [V6,3] 

The tavern on the Place Belhomme. "Under Louis Philippe, it was run by an 
individual connected with the police. Its clientele was composed, in large part, of 
all the conspirators of the day, who assemhled there twice a week, on Mondays and 
Thursdays. The names of confederates were proposed on Thursday, and they were 
admitted on Monday." A. Lepage, Les Cafes politiques et litteraires de Paris (Paris 
<1874>),p. 99. [V6a,l] 

From a secret report, cited in Pokrowski, by the Russian informer Jakov Tolstoi, 
concerning his conversation with the director of the English colonial hank, Camp- 
hell, an agent of Prince Louis Napoleon: "The prince had apprised him of the 
difficulties of his situation, given that he has to hattle against he National {that is , 
against Cavaignac — M.N. P.}, no less than against the red republicans {that is, 
Ledru-Rollin — M.N. P.}, who have enormous sums at their disposal(l). . . . After- 
ward, ... he asked me whether or not the Russian government was likely to en- 
trust the prince with such a sum [which was needed for the electoral campaign and 
could not he raised in England] .... It hecame clear to me then that Mr. Camphell 
was a sort of emissary of Prince Louis and so, in order to divert his attention and 
to put an end to the conversation, I treated the whole affair as a joke. I asked him 
what Louis Napoleon could give to Russia in return for the million he requires. — 
'Every possible concession,' answered Mr. Campbell, getting worked up. 'Then 



Russia can huy the head of the Republic?' I asked. 'And for only a million francs? 
Distributed over the four years of his presidency, this comes to 250,000 a year. You 
will admit that it is not a great deal of money.' — 'I guarantee you that, for this 
price, he will he entirely at your service. ' — 'Will he, at the very least, exert his full 
authority to rid France of Polish and Russian emigrants?' — 'I say to you that he 
will make a formal commitment in this regard, for he presently finds himself in the 
most difficult situation that in general can befall a man!"' M. N. Pokrowski, His- 
torische Aufsiitze (Vienna and Berlin <1928>), p. 120 ("Lamartine, Cavaignac, 
und Nikolaus I"). [V6a,2] 

"The old journeymen's association of compagnons, the beginnings of which go 
hack to the fourteenth, perhaps . . . the twelfth century ... (a number of histori- 
ans derive the Carbonari movement from it) ... , must have especially interested 
Balzac. . . . The compagnons themselves . . . trace their origin to the construction 
of Solomon's temple. ... In the preface to the Histoire des Treize, Balzac makes 
allusion to the compagnons, who even today would have their partisans among the 
French people." Ernst Rohert Curtius, Balzac (Bonn, 1923), p. 34. [V7,l] 

"In France, it was above all the secret society known as La Congregation that 
furnished the public with materials for all sorts of thrilling and gruesome stories. 
The writers of the Restoration, in particular, ascribed to it the hlackest machina- 
tions. The Comte d'Artois, the future Charles X, moved in its orbit. . . . With his 
History of Secret Societies in the Army, Charles Nodier enthralled his readers. He 
himself belonged to the Societe des Philadelphes, founded in 1797. . . . Equally 
harmless was the Societe du Cheval Rouge <Society of the Red Horse >, which 
Balzac founded with Gautier and some others in the firm conviction that, by 
influencing the salons, its members . . . would garner power and glory for one 
another. ... A secret alliance of prison convicts is the Societe des Grands Fanan- 
dels, whose organization forms the hackground for . . . Vautrin." Ernst Robert 
Curtius, Balzac (Bonn, 1923), pp. 32-34. [V7,2] 

The Faubourg Saint-Antoine and the Temple precinct owe their importance for 
handicraft to the fact that the laws which prohibited workers from establishing a 
residence before completing their term as journeymen were not in effect there. 
The journeyman's tour de France required three to four years. [V7,3] 

Along with many other particulars concerning the compagnons, Chaptal reports 
of the enemy clans: "The tools of their trade were always their weapons of war." 
<Jean-Antoine-Claude> Chaptal, De Vlndustrie francaise (Paris, 1819), vol. 2, 
p. 314. [V7,4] 

"Apart from . . . meeting at night in small groups, the German craftsmen in Paris, 
in those years, liked to get together on Sundays with kith and kin in a restaurant 
on the outskirts of town. In January 1845, a former officer of the Garde Nationale, 
Adalbert von Bornstedt, who at that time was spying on radical writers and arti- 



Flora Tristan attempted to free the workers from the terms of their journeyman's 
contract. [V7a,2] 

Schlabrendorf gives an account of the popular comedian Bobeche, who could be 
seen on the Boulevard du Temple. "His stage is so narrow, however, that he has no 
room to gesticulate when his brother-in-law, with whom he performs, is up there 
with him. So he has to stick his hands in his pockets. The other day he exclaimed, 
with reason: I must have a place, I absolutely must have a place! — But you surely 
know that a place must be filled, that you must do some work and earn your 
place? — Filled? You fill just one part of it and the rest is filled hy others. — So what 
place do you want? — The Place Vendome. — The Place Vendome! It will surely he 
difficult for you to have that. — Nothing easier. I shall denounce the Column." 
Graf Gustav von Schlabrendorf in Paris iiber Ereignisse unci Personen seiner Zeit 
[in Carl Gustav Jochmann, Reliquien: Aus seinen Nachgelassenen Papieren, ed. 
Heinrich Zschokke, vol. 1 (Hechingen, 1836), pp. 248-249]. [V7a,3] 

The Carhonari looked on Christ as the first victim of the aristocracy. [V7a,4] 

"The police spies in Paris recognize one another by a hadge bearing the so-called 
eye of providence." Carl Gustav Jochmann, Reliquien, ed. Heinrich Zschokke, 
vol. 3 (Hechingen, 1838), p. 220. [V7a,5] 

"For the work of Balzac ... to appear authentically mythic, it suffices to recall 
that, even during the author's lifetime, there were groups of men and women in 
Venice and in Russia who would assume the parts of characters from his Comedie 
humaine and try to live like them." Roger Caillois, "Paris, my the moderne," 
ISouveUe Revue frmncaise, 25, no. 284 (May 1, 1937), p. 698. [V7a,6] 

"As for Balzac, one need only . . . recall that he is the man whose earliest work (or 
nearly his earliest) happens to be his Histoire impartiale des Jesuites, which he 
considered an homage to 'the most beautiful society ever formed,' and that he is, 
at the same time, the creator of Vautrin and the author of the Histoire des Treize." 
Roger Caillois, "Paris, mythe moderne," Mouvelle Revue francaise, 25, no. 284 



sans in Paris for the Prussian government, described to the latter, in a report 2 

denouncing Marx and Hess, a gathering of this sort in the Avenue de Vincennes, _^ 

where regicide, hatred of the rich, and the aholition of private property were ^ 

openly advocated. " Gustav Mayer, Friedrich Engels, vol. 1 , Friedrich Engels in q 

seiner Friihzeit (Berlin <1933>), p. 252. [V7,5] | 

1 

"Adalbert von Bornstedt . . . was ... a spy ... of the Prussian government. g»' 

Engels and Marx made use of him, knowing well enough, however, whom they were gj 

dealing with." Gustav Mayer, Friedrich Engels, vol. 1, Friedrich Engels in seiner <%. 
Friihzeit, second edition (Berlin), p. 386. [V7a,l] 



(May 1, 1937), pp. 695-696. The Jesuits, like the Assassins, play a role in the 
imaginative world of Balzac, as in that of Baudelaire. [V8,l] 



"Ten French regiments, were they to descend into the catacombs, could not have 
laid a hand on a single Carbonaro, so many were the turns of those dark and 
dismal underground passages, leading to inaccessible retreats. It may be men- 
tioned, furthermore, that the catacombs were admirably mined in five or six 
places, and a spark would have been enough ... to blow up the entire Left Bank." 
A. Dumas, Les Mohicans de Paris, vol. 3 (Paris, 1863), p. 11. [V8,2] 

The conspirators of 1830 were rigorously classical in orientation and bitter foes 
of Romanticism. Blanqui remained true to this type throughout his life. [V8,3] 

Heine on a meeting of Les Amis du Peuple, at which over 1,500 in attendance 
listened to a speech by Blanqui. "The meeting had the odor of an old copy — much 
perused, greasy, and worn — of he Moniteur of 1793." Cited in Gel'froy, L'Enferme 
<ed. 1926 >, vol. 1, p. 59. [V8,4] 

Secret societies after the July Revolution: Ordre et Progres, Union des Condam- 
nes Politiques, Reclamants de Juillet, Francs Regeneres, Societe des Amis du 
Peuple, Societe des Families. [V8,5] 

Organization of the Societe des Saisons, successor to the Societe des Families: At 
the top, four seasons, of which the chief is spring. Each season has three months, 
the chief month being July. The month has four weeks, and their chief is Sun- 
day. — The chiefs are not present at the meetings (or are not recognizable). See 
Geffroy, L'Enferme <ed. 1926 >, vol. 1, p. 79. [V8,6] 

The sections of the Carbonari were known as ventes 12 (the name "Carbonari" goes 
back to a conspiracy organized in the house of a charcoal dealer during the strug- 
gle of the Ghibellines against the Guelphs). Supreme vente, district ventes, local 
ventes. Among the founders of the French section was Bazard. [V8,7] 

J. J. Weiss on the Club des Halles: "The club met in a little room on the second 
floor ahove a cafe; it had few members, and these were serious and thoughtful. 
Think of the atmosphere of the Comedie Frangaise on days when Racine or Cor- 
neille is performed; compare the audience on those days to the crowd that fills a 
circus where acrobats are executing perilous leaps, and you will understand the 
impression made on someone who ventured into this revolutionary club of Blan- 
qui, compared with the impression made hy the two clubs in vogue with the party 
of order, the club of the Folies-Bergere and that of the Salle Valentino. It was like 
a chapel consecrated to the orthodox creed of classical conspiracy, where the 
doors were open to all, but where you never felt like returning unless you helieved. 
After the sullen parade of the oppressed who, every night, would present them- 
selves at this tribunal in order always to denounce someone or something — the 



conspiracy of hankers, an office manager, an administrator of the railroad — the 
priest of the place would rise to his feet and, on the pretext of addressing the 
sorrows of his congregation, the people (represented by the half-dozen furious 
imbeciles who had just been heard), would clarify the situation. His appearance 
was distinguished, his bearing irreproachable; his countenance was delicate, fine, 
and composed, with a fierce and sinister flash that sometimes lit the small and 
piercing eyes, which, in their usual state, were more benevolent than harsh. His 
words were measured, colloquial, and precise; it was, along with that of M. Thiers, 
the least declamatory way of speaking I have ever heard. As to the content of his 
speech, almost everything in it was just. . . . 'Where, then, did Corneille learn the 
art of war?' cried the Grand Conde at the first performance of Sertorius. Blanqui, 
I would surmise, had no more studied war than had Corneille. But possessing, as 
he did, the political faculty to a superlative degree, he could manage, . . . even in 
military matters, all the signals that, when duly heeded, would have called forth 
a salute." Cited in Gustave Geffroy, L'Enferme (Paris, 1897), pp. 346-348. 

[V8a] 

January 1870, after the murder of Victor Noir: Blanqui has the Blanquists, pre- 
sented by Granger, file by before him, without letting the fact be known. "He went 
out, armed, bidding farewell to his sisters, and took up his post on the Champs- 
Elysees. It was there, as Granger had announced to him, that he would find, 
parading before him, the army of which he was the mysterious general. He recog- 
nized the squadron leaders, as they came into view, and, behind each of them, he 
saw the men grouped geometrically and marching in step, as though in regiments. 
It was all done according to plan. Blanqui held his review — strange spectacle — 
without arousing the slightest suspicion. Leaning against a tree, surrounded by the 
crowd of onlookers, the vigilant old man saw his comrades pass by, orderly amid 
the surging of the people, silent amid the steadily mounting uproar." Gustave 
Geffroy, L'Enferme (Paris, 1897), pp. 276-277. [V9,l] 

On the influence of Machiavelli, which Blanqui felt at Sainte-Pelagie: "In contrast 
to the French Blanqui — so lucid, so intelligent, so ironic — there appeared, from 
time to time, this old Italian Blanqui, denizen of Florence or of Venice, who put his 
faith in tenebrous schemes and in the possible success of an act of force." Gustave 
Geffroy, L'Enferme (Paris, 1897), pp. 245-246. [V9,2] 

A type of conspirator characteristic of the 1840s: Daniel Borme, a journeyman, 
half crazy, but above all ambiguous. He worked on assignment from Vidocq, 
who, for his part, took his orders from Caussidiere as much as from Louis 
Napoleon. Bonne put the regiment of the Vesuviemies on their feet; in 1848, he 
was granted an audience, in the company of several Vesuviennes, with Mine, de 
Lamartine. Lamartine himself refused to have any dealings with the Vesuvien- 
nes. There seems to have been a plan to set up workshops for them. Boraie 
makes an appeal to the citoyennes on a poster dated February 28, 1848: 

"To female citizens and patriots, my sisters in the Republic: ... I have asked 



the Provisional Government to register you under the title of \£suviennes. The 
engagement will be for one year; to enlist, you must be between fifteen and 
thirty, and unmarried. Apply at 14 Rue Sainte-Appoline, from noon to four 
o'clock." Cited in Roger Devigne, "Des 'Milicieimes' de 1937 aux 'Vesuviennes' 
de 1848," Vendredi (May 21, 1937). [V9,3] 

Baudelaire, in Ids review of Les Martyrs ridicules, by Leon Cladel: "The man of 
intelligence molds the people, and the visionary creates reality. I have known some 
poor wretches whose heads were turned by Ferragus XXIII and who seriously 
planned to form a secret coalition in order to share, like a rabhle dividing up a 
conquered empire, all the functions and the wealth of modern society." Baude- 
laire, L 'Art romantique (Paris), p. 434. 13 [V9a,l] 

Charles Proles, in Les Homines de la revolution de 1871 <Paris, 1898 >, p. 9, on 
Raoul Rigault, Blanquist and prefect of police during the Commune: "In all 
things, . . . even in his fanaticism, he had a remarkahle sang-froid, an indefinable 
air of the sinister and impassive mystificateur. " Cited in Georges Laronze, Histoire 
de la Commune de 1871 (Paris, 1928), p. 45. In the same text, p. 38, on Rigault's 
specialty, the unmasking of police spies: "Under the Empire, especially, he had 
thrived, . . . keeping his notebook up to date, denouncing, on their arrival, the 
disconcerted agents. 'So how are things with the boss?' And, with a sneer, he 
would announce their names. Blanqui saw in such perspicacity the mark of a 
serviceable talent. He let fall from his lips, one day, this unexpected word of 
praise: 'He is nothing but a gamin, but he makes a first-rate policeman. '" [V9a,2] 

Doctrine of the Blanquists during the Commune: "To issue decrees for the nation 
was to repudiate the Utopia of federalism and . . . , from Paris as the ahiding 
capital, to appear to govern France." Georges Laronze, Histoire de la Commune 
de 1871 (Paris, 1928), p. 120. [V9a,3] 

The Blanquists venerated the memory of Hebert. [ V9a,4] 

"Several editorial offices and boulevard cafes, in particular the Cafe de Suede, 
were the centers ... of conspiracy. From there, the web spread out. It encom- 
passed in its linkages the entire Commune, redoubtable less for the results ob- 
tained (these were effectively nullified by the profusion of plots) than for the 
atmosphere ... of suspicion it produced. At the Hotel de Ville, there were inces- 
sant leaks. No deliberation, no secret decision took place that was not immediately 
known by Thiers." Georges Laronze, Histoire de la Commune de 1871 (Paris, 
1928), p. 383. [V9a,5] 



Marx caps a detailed account of the Society of the Tenth of Decemher, as an 
organization of the lumpenproletariat, with these words: "in short, the whole, 
indefinite, disintegrated mass, thrown hither and thither, which the French term 



la 6o/ie>»e." Karl Marx, Der achtzehnte Brumaire des Louis Bonaparte, eel. 



Re Balzac: "Sainte-Beuve . . . recounts an anecdote stranger , . , than all the 
others. At one point, a whole society meeting in Venice (one of the more aristo- 
cratic of the societies) decided to assign its members different roles drawn from the 
Comedie humaine, and some of these roles, adds the critic mysteriously, were 
taken to the very extreme. . . . This occurred around 1840." Anatole Cerfberr and 
Jules Christophe, Repertoire de la Comedie humaine de H. de Balzac (Paris, 
1887), p. v (Introduction de Paul Bourget). [V10,2] 

In 1828 The Conspiracy of Equals, by Buonarroti, appears in Brussels. "Very 
quickly, his book becomes the breviary of conspirators." Title: <History of Ba- 
beuf's> Conspiracy for Equality, 60,000 copies sold in only a few days. In 1837, 
15,000 people at Buonarroti's interment. Michelet's father had a relation to the 
beginnings of Babeuf; Michelet, to Buonarroti. See Andre Monglond, Le Pre- 
romantisme franqais, vol. 2, he Maitre des dmes sensibles (Grenoble, 1930), 



Rjazanov (Vienna and Berlin <1927>), p. 73. 14 



[V10.1] 



pp. 154-155. 



[V10.3] 