[Fourier] 

Seas they fathom! Skies they reveal! 
Each of these seekers after God 
Takes an infinity upon bis wing: 
Fulton the green, Herschel the blue; 
Magellan sails, Fourier soars. 
The frivolous and ironical crowd 
Sees nothing of their dreams. 

— V'ictor Hugo, L'Annee terrible: Les Precttrseurs, Epigraph 
to the brochure by Pellarin, 104' anniversaire natal de 
Fourier (Paris, 1876), cited in A. Pinloche, Fourier et 
le socialisme (Paris, 1933), supplement 



"The words of Jean Paul which I put at the head of this biography of Fourier — 'Of 
the libers that vibrate in the human soul he cut away none, but rather harmonized 
all' — these words apply admirably to this socialist, and in their fullest resonance 
apply only to him. One could not find a better way to characterize the phalanste- 
rian philosophy." Ch. Pellarin, Notice bibliographique (1839), p. 60, cited in 
A. Pinloche, Fourier et le socialisme (Paris, 1933), pp. 17-18. [Wl,l] 

Fourier on his business career: "My best years were lost in the workshops of 
falsehood, where from all sides the sinister augury rang in my ears: 'A very honest 
boy! He will never be worth anything in business.' Indeed, I was duped and 
robbed in all that I undertook. But if I am worth nothing when it comes to practic- 
ing business, I am worth something when it comes to unmasking it." Charles 
Fourier, 1820, Publication des manuscrits, vol. 1, p. 17, cited in A. Pinloche, 
Fourier et le socialisme (Paris, 1933), p. 15.' [Wl,2] 

Fourier wanted "every woman to have, first of all, a husband with whom she could 
conceive two children; second, a breeder (geniteur) with whom she could have 
only one child; then, a lover (favorit ) who has lived with her and retained this 
title; fourth and last, mere possessors (possesseurs ), who are nothing in the eyes of 
the law. ... A man who expressly says that a girl of eighteen who has not yet found 
a man is entitled to prostitute herself; a man who directs that all girls be divided 
into two classes, the juveniles (under eighteen) and the emancipated (over eight- 



een), which last would have the right to take a lover and bear illegitimate children; 
a man who . . . maintains that unmarried young women who give themselves up to 
pleasure possess qualities superior to those of married women, . . . and describes 
in great detail how an entire army of women should enter into prostitution under 
the supervision of matrons — such a man does not understand the eternal bases of 
humanity." Sigmund Englander, Geschichte der franzdsischen Arbeiter-Associa- 
tionen (Hamburg, 1864), vol. 1, pp. 245, 261-262. — In the same vein: "What are 
we to say of a system in -whichfilles publiques are given the name bacchantes and in 
which it is argued that they are just as necessary as vestal virgins, and that they 
. . . exercise the virtue of fellowship? A system which describes in what manner 
innocent young people are supposed to lose their innocence?" (ibid., pp. 245-24.6). 

[Wl,3] 

"Around 1803 or 1804, Fourier, who practiced the profession of commercial trav- 
eler — or 'shop-sergeant,' as he preferred to call it — found himself in Paris. Hav- 
ing before him a four-month wait for a position he had been promised, he looked 
around for some means of occupying his time and hit upon the idea of searching 
for a way to make all men happy. It was not with the expectation of obtaining any 
practical results that he entered on this project, but purely as a jeu d'esprit." 
Charles-M. Limousin, LeFourierisme (Paris, 1898), p. 3. [Wl,4] 

"Fourier is so prodigal in his invention and his crazy descriptions that Lerminier 
justifiably compares him to Swedenborg. . . . Fourier, too, was at home in all skies 
and on all planets. After all, he calculated mathematically the transmigration of 
the soul, and went on to prove that the human soul must assume 810 different 
forms until it completes the circuit of the planets and returns to earth, and that, in 
the course of these existences, 720 years must be happy, 45 years favorable, and 45 
years unfavorable or unhappy. And has he not described what will happen to the 
soul after the demise of our planet, and prophesied, in fact, that certain privileged 
souls will retire to the sun? He reckons further that our souls will come to inhabit 
all other planets and worlds, after spending 80,000 years on planet Earth. He 
calculates, in addition, that this termination of the human race will occur only 
after it has enjoyed the benefits of the boreal light: for 70,000 years. He proves that 
by the influence, not of the boreal light, to be sure, hut of the gravitational force of 
labor, . . . the climate of Senegal will become as moderate as summers in France 
are now. He describes how, once the sea has turned to lemonade, men will trans- 
port fish from the great ocean to the inland seas, the Caspian, Aral, and Black 
Seas, given that the horeal light reacts less potently with these salty seas; and so, in 
this way, saltwater fish will accustom themselves gradually to the lemonade, until 
finally they can be restored to the ocean. Fourier also says that, in its eighth 
ascending period, humanity will acquire the capacity to live like fish in the water 
and to fly like hirds in the air, and that, by then, humans will have reached a 
height of seven feet and a life span of at least 144 years. Everyone, at that point, 
will be able to transform himself into an amphibian; for the individual will have 
the power of opening or closing at will the valve that connects the two chambers of 



the heart, so as to bring the blood directly to the heart without having it pass 
through the lungs. . . . Nature will evolve in such fashion, he maintains, that a time 
will come when oranges blossom in Siberia and the most dangerous animals have 
been replaced by their opposites. Anti-lions, anti-whales will be at man's service 
then, and the calm will drive his ships. In this way, according to Fourier, the lion 
will serve as the best of horses and the shark will be as useful in fishing as the dog 
is in hunting. New stars will emerge to take the place of the moon, which already, 
by then, will have begun to rot." Sigmund Englander, Geschichte der franzo- 
sischenArbeiter-Associationen (Hamburg, 1864), vol. 1, pp. 240-244. [Wla] 

"Fourier, ... in his last years, . . . wanted to found a phalanstery that would be 
inhabited exclusively by children aged three to fourteen, of which he aimed to 
assemble 12,000; but his appeal went unheeded and the project was never real- 
ized. In his writings he left a detailed plan, which specifically describes how the 
children must be raised so as to further the idea of association. From the moment 
a child begins to walk, an attempt must be made to identify its tastes and passions, 
and, by this means, to discover its vocation. Children who show a liking for life in 
the street, who make a racket and refuse to learn neatness and cleanliness, are 
placed by Fourier in small bands which have charge of the more unpleasant tasks 
of the association. On the other side there are children in whom the taste for 
elegance and luxury is inborn; these again Fourier arranges in a group, so that by 
their presence on the scene the phalanx will not be lacking in luxury. . . . The 
children are to become . . . great artists of song. Every phalanx, Fourier says, will 
have 700 to 800 actors, musicians, and dancers, and the poorest canton in the Alps 
or the Pyrenees will have an opera company at least as good as the Grand Opera of 
Paris, if not much better. In order to foster the general sense for harmony, Fourier 
would have the children already singing duets and trios in the nursery." Sigmund 
Englander, Geschichte der franzdsischen Arbeiter-Associationen (Hamburg, 
1864), vol. 1 , pp. 242-243. [ W2,l] 

"Among the disciples of Fourier, one of the most entertaining was this Alphonse 
Toussenel, who, in 1847 and 1852 respectively, published those works so popular 
in their day, L 'Esprit des betes and he Monde des oiseaux. . . . Like Fourier, . . . 
he sees in nature only animate beings: 'The planets,' he affirms, 'have great duties 
to fulfill, first as members of the solar system, then as mothers of families.' And he 
voluptuously describes the amours of the Earth and the Sun: 'As the lover dresses 
in his most beautiful robes, and glosses his hair, and perfumes his language for the 
visit of his love, thus every morning the Earth indues her richest attire to meet the 
rays of her star beloved .... Happy, thrice happy the Earth, that no council of the 
stars has yet thundered its anathema against the immorality of the kisses of the 
Sun!' . . . 'Professors of the officially sanctioned physical sciences dare not speak 
of the two sexes of electricity; they find it more moral to speak of its twopo/es. . . . 
Such absurdities are beyond me. ... If the fire of love did not kindle all beings, 
metals and minerals as well as others, where, I ask, would be the reason for those 
ardent affinities of potassium for oxygen, of hydrochloric acid for water?'" 



<Toussenel,> L'Espritdes betes <6th edition) (Paris, 1862), pp. 9, 2-3, 102-106. 2 
Cited in Rene de Planhol, Les Utopistes de V amour (Paris, 1921), pp. 219—220. 

[W2,2] 



"Our planet goes into material decline once its inhabitants begin to hackslide down 
the social scale. It is like a tree whose leaves the caterpillars have been allowed to 
devour over a period of years: the tree languishes and dies." From Fourier, 
Theorie en abstrait ou negative, p. 325. "Our vortex is young, and a column of 
102 planets is presently on course for an entry into our universe, which is on the 
point of advancing from the third to the fourth power." From Fourier, Theorie des 
quatre inouvements (1808), pp. 75, 462, and Theorie mixte ou speculative et Syn- 
thase routiniere de V association, pp. 260, 263. Cited in E. Silherling, Dictionnaire 
de sociologie phalansterienne (Paris, 1911), pp. 339, 338. [W2a,l] 

Gay's newspaper, he Communiste: "What was noteworthy, in his case, was that he 
championed the view that communism could not possibly be achieved without a 
complete alteration in sexual relations. . . . 'In a communist society . . . , not only 
would all men and women enter into a great many intimate relationships with 
persons of the opposite sex, but even at their first encounter a genuine sympathy 
would spring up hetween them.'" Englander, Geschichte der franzosischen Ar- 
beiter-Associationen, vol. 2, pp. 93-94. [W2a,2] 

On Cabet: "The cry was not: Let us emigrate to America and there, with utmost 
exertion, found a colony in the wilderness. . . . Rather, Cabet was saying: 'Let us 
go to Icaria! ' . . . Let us enter boldly into this novel, let us give life to Icaria, let us 
free ourselves from all privations . . . ! Every article in his newspaper would refer 
henceforth to Icaria; this went so far that he would describe, for example, how 
several workers were injured by the explosion of a steam engine in La Villette and 
conclude his account with the words, 'Let us go to Icaria!'" Englander, vol. 2, 
pp. 120-121. [W2a,3] 

On Cahet: "Most of the correspondents write as though they have escaped the 
general destiny of humanity by journeying to America." [This pertains to the 
correspondents for he Populaire.] Englander, vol. 2, p. 128. [W2a,4] 

"Cahet, whom the radical republican party attacked because they considered him 
an opiate-monger," had to "remove to Saint-Quentin ... so as to defend himself 
from accusations of revolutionary agitation. The accusation was to the effect that, 
even if the Icarians should embark with Cabet, they would disembark at another 
point on the coast of France, in order to begin the revolution." Englander, vol. 2, 
p. 142. D Secret Societies D [W2a,5] 

"Mercury taught us to read. He brought us the alphabet, the declensions, and 
finally the entire grammar of the unitary Harmonian language, as spoken on 



the sun and the harmonized planets." Citation from Fourier, in Maurice Har- 
mel, "Charles Fourier," Portraits d'hier, vol. 2, no. 36 (Paris, 1910), p. 184.. 

[W2a,6] 



"Among all the contemporaries of Hegel, Charles Fourier was the only one who 
saw through bourgeois relations as clearly as he himself did." G. Plekhanov, "Zu 
Kegels sechzigstem Todestag," Die neue Zeit, 10, no. 1 (Stuttgart, 1892), p. 243. 

[W2a,7] 

Fourier speaks "of the ascendancy of the principle of 'industrial passion' (fougue 
industrielle), the universal enthusiasm that is ruled by the laws ... of the 'com- 
posite' or the 'coincident.' On a cursory inspection, it might appear as though we 
had reached this stage today. Industrial passion is represented by the rage to 
speculate and the impulse to accumulate capital; the passion coi'ncidente (drive 
toward incorporation), by the consolidation of capital, its increasing concentra- 
tion. But even though the elements discovered by Fourier are present in this 
relation, they are neither articulated nor regulated in the manner he envisioned 
and anticipated." Charles Bonnier, "Das Fourier'sche Prinzip der Anziehung," 
Die neue Zeit, 10, no. 2 (Stuttgart, 1892), p. 648. [W3,l] 

"We can see from his works that Fourier expected his theory to be accomplished 
beginning in the year of their publication. In his Prolegomenes, he designates . . . 
1822 as the year when the establishment of the experimental colony of the Harmo- 
nian association was to be prepared. This colony was supposed to be actually 
founded and put into practice the following year, whereupon 1824 would necessar- 
ily see its general imitation by the rest of the civilized world." Charles Bonnier, 
"Das Fourier'sche Prinzip der Anziehung," Die neue Zeit, 10, no. 2 (Stuttgart, 
1892), p. 642. [W3,2] 

Aftereffects: "In Zola's powerful novel he Travail <Lahor>, the great Utopian was 
supposed to celebrate his resurrection. . . . Leconte de Lisle, later the famous 
leader of the Parnassian school, was, in his Sturm-und-Drang period, a singer of 
Fourierist socialism. A contributor to La Revue socialiste . . . [see the November 
1901 issue] informs us that, at the invitation of the editors of La Democratic 
pacifique, . . . the poet contributed first to this latter journal and then briefly to 
La Phalange.'''' H. Thurow, "Aus den Anfiingen der sozialistischen Belletristik," 
Die neue Zeit, 21, no. 2 (Stuttgart, 1903), p. 221. [W3,3] 

"The political economists and politicians from whom the pre-1848 socialists had 
learned were, in every case, opposed to strikes. They explained to the workers that 
a strike, even though successful, would bring them no advantage, and that the 
workers should put their money into cooperatives for production and consump- 
tion rather than into plans for a strike." Proudhon "had . . . the ingenious idea of 
inciting the workers to strike in order not to increase their wages but to lower 
them. ... In this way, the worker obtains two or three times more as a consumer 



than he earns as a producer." <Paul> Lafargue, "Der Klassenkampf in Frank- 
reich," Die neue Zeit, 12, no. 2 (1894), pp. 644, 616. [W3,4] 



"Fourier, Saint-Simon, and other reformers recruited their followers ahnost ex- 
clusively from the ranks of the artisans . . . and from the intellectual elite of the 
bourgeoisie. With a few exceptions, it was educated people who gathered around 
them, people who thought they had not received from society consideration 
sufficient to their merits. ... It was the declasses, those who had transformed 
themselves into daring entrepreneurs, shrewd businessmen, or speculators. . . . 
M. Godin, for example, . . . founded in Guise (in the departement of Aisne) a 
familistere according to Fourier's principles. In handsome buildings surrounding 
a spacious, glass-covered square courtyard, he provided accommodations for nu- 
merous workers from his plate-enameling factory; here they found, besides a 
home, all necessary articles for daily use . . . , entertainments in a theater, con- 
certs, schools for their children, and so on. In short, M. Godin saw to all their 
physical and spiritual needs, and moreover realized . . . enormous profits. He 
earned the reputation of being a benefactor of mankind, and died a multimillion- 
aire. "Paul Lafargue, "Der Klassenkampf in Frankreich," Die neue Zeit, 12, no. 2 
(Stuttgart, 1894), p. 617. [W3a,l] 

Fourier on stocks and bonds: "In his Traite de V unite universelle, Fourier enu- 
merates . . . the advantages which this form of property offers the capitalists: 'It 
does not run the danger of being stolen or damaged through fire or earthquake. 
... A minor never risks being taken advantage of in the administration of his 
money, since that administration is the same for him as for every other share- 
holder . . . ; a capitalist can realize his property at any moment, even though he 
owned a hundred million'; and so forth. . . . On the other hand, 'the poor man, 
though he have but one taler, can participate in the holding of public stock, which 
is divided up into quite small portions, . . . and hence . . . can speak of our pal- 
aces, our storehouses, our wealth.' Napoleon III and his cohorts in the coup d'etat 
were very taken with these ideas; . . . they democratized state revenue, as one of 
them put it, by making it possible to purchase bonds for five francs or even one 
franc. By such methods, they thought to interest the masses in the solidity of 
public credit and preclude political revolutions." Paul Lafargue, "Marx' histor- 
ischer Materialismus," Die neue Zeit, 22, no. 1 (Stuttgart, 1904), p. 831. [W3a,2] 

"Fourier is not only a critic; his imperturbably serene nature makes him a satirist, 
and assuredly one of the greatest satirists of all time." Engels, 3 cited in Rudolf 
Franz, review of E. Silberling's Dictionnaire de sociologie phalanstetienne (Paris, 
1911), Die neue Zeit, 3t, no. 1 (Stuttgart, 1912), p. 333. [W3a,3] 

The propagation of the phalanstery takes place through an "explosion." Fourier 
speaks of an "explosion du phalanstere." [W3a,4] 

In England, the influence of Fourier combined with that of Swedenborg. 

[W3a,5] 



"Heine was well acquainted with socialism. He could still see Fourier in person. In 
his articles entitled FranzosiscJie Zustdnde <French Affairs >, he writes at one 
point (June 15, 1843): 'Yes, Pierre Leroux is poor, just as Saint-Simon and 
Fourier were poor, and by the providential poverty of these great socialists the 
world was enriched. . . . Fourier likewise had recourse to the charity of friends. 
How often have I seen him scurrying past the columns of the Palais-Royal in his 
shabby gray coat, both pockets laden so that out of one was peeping the neck of a 
bottle and out of the other a long loaf of bread. The friend of mine who first 
pointed him out to me drew my attention to the indigence of the man, who had to 
fetch drink for himself at the wineshop and bread at the bakery."' 4 Cited in "Heine 
an Marx," Die neue Zeit, 14, no. 1 (Stuttgart, 1896), p. 16; passage originally in 
<Heine,> Sdmtliche Werlee, ed. Bilsche (Leipzig), vol. 5, p. 34 ["Kommunismus, 
Philosophie, und Klerisei," part 1]. [W4,l] 

"In his glosses to the memoirs ofAnnenkov, Marx writes: '. . .Fourier was the first 
to mock the idealization of the petty bourgeoisie."' Reported by P. Anski, "Zur 
Charakteristik von Marx," Russkaia Mysl (August 1903), p. 63; in N. Rjasanof'f, 
"Marx unci seine russischen Bekannten in den vierziger Jahren," Die neue Zeit, 



"Herr Griin finds it an easy matter to criticize Fourier's treatment of love; he 
measures Fourier's criticism of existing amorous relationships against the fanta- 
sies by which Fourier tried to get a mental image of free love. Herr Griin, the true 
German phiJistine, takes these fantasies seriously. Indeed, they are the only thing 
which he does take seriously. It is hard to see why, if he wanted to deal with this 
side of the system at all, Griin did not also enlarge upon Fourier's remarks con- 
cerning education; they are by far the best of their kind, and contain some mas- 
terly observations. . . . 'Fourier is the very worst expression of civilized egoism' 
(p. 208). He supplies immediate proof of this hy relating that, in Fourier's world 
order, the poorest memher eats from forty dishes every clay, that five meals are 
eaten daily, that people live to the age of 144, and so on. With a naive sense of 
humor, Fourier opposes a Gargantuan view of man to the unassuming mediocrity 
of the men [in Das Westphcilische Dampfboot, the following words . . . inserted 
after 'men': 'the infinitely small — Beranger'] of the Restoration period; hut Herr 
Griin sees in this merely a chance of moralizing in his philistine way upon the most 
innocent side of Fourier's fancy, which he abstracts from the rest." Karl Marx 
writing about Karl Griin as historian of socialism (in an article originally publish- 
ed in Das Westphiilische Dampfboot, August— Septemher 1847), reprinted in Die 



The phalanstery can be characterized as human machinery. This is no reproach, 
nor is it meant to indicate anything mechanistic; rather, it refers to the great 
complexity of its structure <AuJiau>. The phalanstery is a machine made of 



31, no. 1 (Stuttgart, 1913), p. 764. 



[W4,2] 



neue Zeit, 18, no. 1 (Stuttgart, 1900), pp. 137-138."' 



[W4,3] 



human beings. 



[W4,4] 



Fourier's point of departure: the reflection on small business. Compare, in this 
connection, the following: "When one considers the number of people in Paris 
whose lives depend on small business — the size of this formidable army exclu- 
sively occupied with measuring, weighing, packaging, and transporting from one 
end of town to the other — one is rightly alarmed. ... It must be recalled that, in 
our industrial cities, a shop is generally run by three or four families. . . . 'Sordidi 
etiam qui mercantur a mercatoribus quod statim vendant; nihil enim proficiunt 
nisi admodum mentiantur. Nec vero quicquam est turpius vanitate' (De Officii*)? 
. . . The current president of the Chamber of Commerce last year formally 
requested once again, as a remedy for commercial anarchy, the reestablishment 
of guilds." Eugene Buret, De la Misere des classes laborieuses en Angleterre et en 
France (Paris, 1840), vol. 2, pp. 216-218. [W4a,l] 

"The modern proletariat's lack of history, the detachment of the first generation of 
factory workers from every historical tradition of class and profession, and the 
diversity of its origin — in handicrafts, small landholdings, agrarian labor, and 
domestic concerns of every sort — made this category of economic man receptive to 
a vision of the world that would improvise ex novo a new state, a new economy, and 
a new morality. The novelty of what was to he achieved corresponded logically to 
the novelty of the situation in which the new men and women found themselves." 
Robert Michels, "Psychologie der antikapitalistischen Massenhewegungen," 
p. 313 [Grundriss der Sozialokonomik, vol. 9, no. 1, Die gesellsclmftliche 
Schichtung im Kapitalismus (Tiihingen, 1926)]. [W4a,21 

"Grandville's life is unremarkable enough: peaceful, remote from all excess, at the 
periphery of dangerous enthusiasms. . . . His youth was that of an honest clerk in 
a respectable shop, where, on rows of spotless shelves, were arrayed — not without 
malice — the various images that corresponded to the need for criticism which an 
'average Frenchman' might feel in 1827." <Pierre> MacOrlan, "Grandville le 
precurseur," Arts et metiers graphiques, 44 (December 15, 1934) <p. 20>. 

[W4a,3] 

Fourier and Saint-Simon: "Fourier is more interesting and more diversified in his 
economic analysis and in his critique of the existing social order. But, then, Saint- 
Simon has the advantage over Fourier in his representations of future economic 
development. Obviously, this development had to move ... in the direction of a 
global economy . . . , and not in the direction of many self-sufficient little econo- 
mies, such as Fourier imagined. Saint-Simon conceives the capitalist order ... as 
a step . . . , while Fourier rejects it in the name of the petty bourgeoisie." V. Volgin, 
"Uher die historische Stellung Saint-Simons," in (Marx-Engels Archiv, vol. 1 
<Frankfurt am Main, 1928 > , p. 118. [W4a,4] 

"In an exchange of views with the writer Camille Mauclair, . . . Zola . . . declared 
unequivocally that he hore no love for collectivism; he found it smallhearted and 
Utopian. He was an anarchist rather than a socialist. . . . Utopian socialism, ... as 



he saw it, took its rise from the individual workshop, proceeded to the idea of the 
association of producers, and aimed to achieve a communism of the general com- 
munity. This was before 1848. . . . Zola, however, wanted to revive the method of 
this period; he . . . took up the . . . ideas of Fourier, which were conditioned by the 
embryonic relations of capitalist production, and attempted to ally them to the 
modern form of this production, which had grown to gigantic proportions." Franz 
Diederich, "Zola als Utopist" (on Le Travail ), Die neue Zeit, 20, no. 1 (Stuttgart), 
pp. 326-327, 329. [W5,l] 

Fourier (in Le Nouveau Monde industriel et societcdre, 1829) disapproves of the 
contempt for gastronomy. "This gaucherie is yet another of those exploits of 
morality calculated to rum us into enemies of our own senses, and into friends of 
that commercial activity which serves merely to provoke the abuses of sensual 
pleasure." E. Poisson, Fourier [contains selected texts] (Paris, 1932), p. 131. Thus, 
Fourier here views immoral businesses as a complement to idealist morality. To 
both he opposes his hedonistic materialism. His position recalls, from afar, that of 
Georg Biichner. The words t[uoted above might have been spoken by Biichner's 
Danton. [W5,2] 

"A phalanx does not sell a thousand quintals of flour of indifferent quality; it sells 
a thousand quintals classified according to a scale of five, six, or seven varieties of 
flavor, which it has tested in a hakery and distinguished in terms of the field where 
it was harvested and the method of cultivation. . . . Such an agricultural mecha- 
nism will contrast sharply with the practices of our backward world, our civiliza- 
tion so in need of perfecting. . . . We see among ourselves, furthermore, 
merchandise of inferior quality that is twenty times more abundant and more 
easily sold than better-quality goods. ... As a result of this circumstance, we can 
no longer even recognize the inferior quality; morality accustoms the civilized to 
eating the good and the bad indiscriminately. From this coarseness of taste follow 
all the knaveries of mercantilism." Theorie des quatre mouvements (1828), cited 
in E. Poisson, Fourier (Paris, 1932), pp. 134-135.' — Already children are taught 
to "clean their plates." [W5,3] 

"Knowing . . . that sometimes, in the region of the North Pole, there is generated 
an electrical discharge which lights up those lands plunged in darkness for six 
months of the year, Fourier announces that, when the earth shall have been ra- 
tionally cultivated in all its parts, the aurora borealis will be continuous. Is this 
absurd?" The author endeavors, following this, to provide an explanation: the 
transformed earth will absorb less electricity from the sun, and whatever is not 
absorbed will encircle it as a ring of Northern Lights. Charles-M. Limousin, Le 
Fourierisme: Reponse a un article de Edmond ViUey intitule "Fourier et son oeu- 
vre" (Paris, 1898), p. 6. [W5a,l] 



"There would be nothing very surprising in the fact that Fourier had been associ- 
ated . . . with a Martinist lodge, or at the very least had felt the influence of a 



milieu in which such ideas flourished." Charles-M. Limousin, he Fourierisme 
(Paris, 1898), p. 9. [W5a,2] 



Worthy of note is the fact — to which Limousin adverts — that, with Fourier, the 
desire for possession is not a "passion." This same commentator defines the 
concept of passion mecanisante as that passion which governs the play of the 
others. He remarks further (p. 15): "Fourier was surely wrong to make a joke of 
duty." Certainly apt is his observation (p. 17) that Fourier is more an inventor 
than a scientist. [W5a,3] 

"In Fourier, occult science acquires a new form — that of industry." Ferrari, "Des 
Idees et de l'ecole de Fourier," Revue des deux mondes, 11, no. 3 (1845), p. 405. 

[W5a,4] 

On Fourier's machinal mode of conception. The table entitled "Mesh of the Lodg- 
ments of Harmony" establishes, for apartments in street-galleries, twenty differ- 
ent categories of rentals, priced from 50 to 1,000 francs, and offers, among others, 
the following justification: "This meshing of the six series is a law of the twelfth 
passion. The simple progression, whether constantly increasing or decreasing, 
would have very serious drawbacks. In principle, it would he false and deleteri- 
ous, insofar as it was simple. ... In application, it would he injurious, insofar as 
... it gave to the hody of dwellings in the wings . . . the appearance of an inferior 
class. Care must be taken to avoid this arrangement, which would be simple and 
therefore detrimental to the meshing of the different classes."' 1 Thus, within a 
single section of the street-galleries, lodgers of different social standing will reside 
together. "I put off discussion of the stables . . . , about which I shall furnish . . . 
ample details in special chapters to follow. For now, our concern is with lodg- 
ments, of which one part alone — the street-gallery, the hall of universal linkage — 
conclusively proves that, after 3,000 years of research into architecture, civilized 
men have yet to learn anything about the bond of unity." Cited in E. Poisson, 
Fourier [anthology] (Paris, 1932), pp. 145-146. [W5a,5] 

Aspects of Fourierist number mysticism, according to Ferrari, "Des Idees et de 
l'ecole de Fourier" (Revue des deux mondes, 14., no. 3 [Paris, 1845]): "Everything 
indicates that Fourierism bases itself on the Pythagorean harmony. ... Its science 
was the science of the ancients" (p. 397). "Number reproduces its rhythm in the 
evaluation of earnings" (p. 398). The inhabitants of the phalanstery comprise 2 X 
810 men and women; for "the number 810 gives them a complete series of chords 
corresponding to the multitude of cabalist assonances" (p. 396). "If, with Fourier, 
the science of the occult takes on a new form, that of industry, it should not be 
forgotten that form per se counts for nothing in this airy poetry of the mys- 
tagogies" (p. 405). "Number groups all heings according to its symbolic laws; it 
develops all the groups through series; the series distributes the harmonies 
throughout: the universe. . . . For the series ... is perfect throughout all of na- 
ture. . . . Man alone is unhappy; hence, civilization inverts the number which 



should govern him. Let us rescue it from civilization. . . . The order that domi- 
nates physical movement — organic movement, animal movement — will thus radi- 
ate in . . . passional movement; nature itself will organize the association" 
(p. 395-396). [W6,l] 

Foreshadowing of the bourgeois Icing in Fourier: "He speaks of kings who devote 
themselves to locksmithery, to woodworking, to selling fish, to the manufacture 
of sealing wax." Ferrari, "Des Idees et de l'ecole de Fourier," Revue des deux 
mondes, 14, no. 3 (1845) p. 393. [W6,2] 

"All his life, Fourier was engaged in thinking; but he never once asked himself 
where his ideas came from. He portrays the human being as a machine passion- 
nelle; his psychology begins with the senses and ends with the composite, without 
presupposing . . . the intervention of reason in the solution of the problem of 
happiness." Ferrari, "Des Idees et de l'ecole de Fourier," Revue des deux mondes, 
no. 3 (1845), p. 404. [W6,3] 

Utopian elements: "The combined order comprises 'the glory of the arts and sci- 
ences, the spectacle of knight-errantry, gastronomy combined in a political 
sense, . . . and a politique galante for the levy of troops" (Ferrari, p. 399). "The 
world turns to its antitype, as dangerous and savage animals enter the service of 
mankind: lions are used for delivering the mail. The aurora borealis reheats the 
poles; the atmosphere, at the earth's surface, becomes clear as a mirror; the seas 
grow calm; and four moons light up the night. In short, the earth renews itself 
twenty-eight times, until the great soul of our planet (now enfeebled, exhausted) 
passes on, with all its human souls, to another planet" (Ferrari, p. 401). [W6,4] 

"Fourier excels in the observation of animality, whether in beasts or in men. He 
has a genius for common matters." Ferrari, "Des Idees et de l'ecole de Fourier," 
Revue des deux mondes, 14, no. 3 (1845), p. 393. [ W6a,l] 

A Fourierist formula: "Nero will be more useful than Fenelon" (in Ferrari, 
p. 399). [W6a,2] 

In the following scheme of twelve passions, the four in the second group represent 
the passions groupantes, the three in the third group the passions seriantes: "first 
the live senses; then love, friendship, family feeling, ambition; third, the passions 
for intrigue, for mutability, for union — in other words, the cabalist, the butterfly, 
the composite; a thirteenth passion, 'unityism,' absorbs all the others." Ferrari, 
"Des Idees et de l'ecole de Fourier," Revue des deux mondes, 14, no. 3 (1845), 
p. 394. [W6a,3] 

From Fourier's last work, La Fausse Industrie <1835-1836>: "The celebrated 
American hoax associated with Herschel's discoveries ahout the world of the 
moon' had raised in Fourier, once the hoax was revealed as such, the hope of a 
direct vision of the phalanstery on other planets. . . . Here is Fourier's response: 



'The American hoax,' he declares, 'proves, first, the anarchy of the press; second, 
the harrenness of storytellers concerned with the extraterrestrial; third, man's 
ignorance of the atmospheric shells; fourth, the need for a megatelescope. '" Fer- 
rari, "Des Idees et de l'ecole de Fourier," Revue des deux mondes, 14, no. 3 
(1845), p. 415. [W6a,4] 

Allegorical specimens from La Fausse Industrie: "On earth Venus creates the 
mulberry hush, symhol of morality, and the raspherry filled with verse, symhol of 
the countermorality preached in the theaters." Ferrari, "Des Idees et de l'ecole de 
Fourier," Revue des deux mondes, no. 3 (1845), p. 416. [W6a,5] 

"According to Fourier, the phalanstery should he ahle to earn, merely from spec- 
tators alone, 50 million francs in two years." Ferrari, "Des Idees et de l'ecole de 
Fourier," Revue des deux mondes, no. 3 (1845), p. 412. [W6a,6] 

"The phalanstery, for Fourier, was a veritable hallucination. He saw it every- 
where, hoth in civilization and in nature. Never was he lacking for a military 
parade; the drilling of soldiers was for him a representation of the all-powerful 
play of the group and of the series inverted for a work of destruction." Ferrari, 
"Des Idees et de l'ecole de Fourier," Revue des deux mondes, no. 3 (1845), p. 409. 

[W6a,7] 



Fourier, in connection with a proposal for a miniature pedagogical colony: "Ful- 
ton was supposed to have constructed or merely drawn up plans for a delicate little 
launch that would have demonstrated, on a miniature scale, the power of steam. 
This skiff was to have transported from Paris to Saint-Cloud — without sails or 
oars or horses — a half-dozen nymphs, who, on their return from Saint-Cloud, 
would have publicized the prodigy and put all the Parisian beau monde in a flut- 
ter." Ferrari, "Des Idees et de l'ecole de Fourier," Revue des deux mondes, no. 3 
(1845), p. 414. [W7,l] 

"The plan to encircle Paris with fortifications would squander hundreds of mil- 
lions of francs for reasons of defense, whereas this magician, with only a million, 
would root out forever the cause of all wars and all revolutions." Ferrari, "Des 
Idees et de l'ecole de Fourier," Revue des deux mondes, 14, no. 3 (1845), p. 413. 

[W7.2] 



Michelet on Fourier: "Singular contrast between his boast of materialism and his 
self-sacrificing, disinterested, and spiritual life!" J. Michelet, he Peuple (Paris, 
1846), p. 294. 1() [W7,3] 

Fourier's conception of the propagation of the phalansteries through "explo- 
sions" may be compared to two articles of my "politics": the idea of revolution as 
an innervation of the technical organs of the collective (analogy with the child 
who learns to grasp by trying to get hold of the moon), and the idea of the 
"cracking open of natural teleology." <See W8a,5 and Xla,2.> [W7,4] 



Fourier, Oeuvres, vol. <3>, p. 260: "List of charges to he hrought against God, on 
the hypothesis of a gap in the divine social code." [W7,5] 



A take on the ideas of Fourier: "King Clodomir, restored hy harmony to his natu- 
ral vocation, is no longer that ferocious Merovingian who has his confrere Sigis- 
mond thrown into a pit. 'He is a friend of flowers and of verse, an active partisan 
of musk roses, of golden plums and fresh pineapples, and many another growing 
thing. . . . He weds the vestal Antigone and follows her as trouhadour to join the 
Hippocrene phalanx.' And Louis XVI, instead of filling so pitiably the job of king 
for which he was hardly cut out, makes magnificent door locks." Charles Louan- 
dre, Les Idees subversives de notre temps (Paris, 1872), p. 59 [citation given with- 
out indication of source]. [W7,6] 

Delvau, in Les Lions du jour (Paris, 1867), p. 5, speaks of Fourier's "ingenious 
argot." [W7,7] 

"It is easy to understand that every 'interest' on the part of the masses . . . goes far 
beyond its real limits in the 'idea' or 'imagination' when it first comes on the scene, 
and is confused with human interest in general. This illusion constitutes what 
Fourier calls the 'tone' of each historical epoch." Marx and Engels, Die heilige 
Familie, in Dec historische Materialismus, vol. 1 <Leipzig, 1932>,p. 379." 

[W7,8] 

Augustin-Louis Cauchy is mentioned by Toussenel (L'Esprit des betes [Paris, 
1884], p. Ill) 12 as a mathematician with Fourierist leanings. [W7a,l] 

In a passage concerned with Malthusianism, Toussenel explains that the solution 
to the problem resides in the double (= filled?) rose of Rhodes, whose stamen- 
filaments have heen transformed into petals, "and which consequently hecomes 
harren hy exuberance of sap and of richness. In other words, ... so long as misery 
shall continue increasing, the fecundity of the female sex will follow the same 
course; and there is but one method of curhing this continual prolification — 
namely, to surround all women with the delights of luxury. . . . Except through 
luxury . . . , except through general riches, no salvation!" A. Toussenel, L'Esprit 
des betes: Zoologie passionnel (Paris, 1884), p. 85. 1:1 [W7a,2] 

On the feminism of the Fourierist school: "On Herschel and Jupiter, hotany 
courses are taught hy young vestals of eighteen to twenty. . . . When I say 'eighteen 
to twenty,' I speak the language of Earth, since the years on Jupiter are twelve 
times longer than ours, and the vestalate hegins only toward the hundredth year." 
A. Toussenel, L'Esprit des betes (Paris, 1884), p. 93." [W7a,3] 

A model of Fourierist psychology in Tbussenel's chapter on the wild boar. "Now, 
surrounding the dwellings of humanity are great quantities of broken glass bot- 
tles, rusty nails, and candle ends, which would be completely lost to society if 



some careful and intelligent hand did not charge itself with the collection of all 
these valueless relics, to reconstruct out of them a mass susceptible of being 
reworked and made fit for consumption again. This important task evidendy 
belongs among the attributes of the miser. . . . Here the character and mission of 
the miser perceptibly rise: the pinch-penny becomes a ragpicker, a salvage opera- 
tor. . . . The hog is the great salvager of nature; he fattens at nobody's expense." 
A. Toussenel, L'Esprit des betes (Paris, 1884), pp. 249-250. 15 fW7a,4] 

Marx characterizes the insufficiency of Fourier, who conceived "a particular form 
of labor — lahor leveled down, parceled, and therefore unf ree — . . . as the source 
of private property's perniciousness and of its existence in estrangement from 
men," instead of denouncing lahor as such, as the essence of private property. 
Karl Marx, Der historische Materialismus, ed. Landshut and Mayer (Leipzig 
< 1932>), vol. 1, p. 292 ("Nationalokonomie und Philosophic"). 1 * [W7a,5] 

Fourierist pedagogy, like the pedagogy of Jean Paul, should be studied in the 
context of anthropological materialism. In this, the role of anthropological mate- 
rialism in France should be compared with its role in Germany. It might turn out 
that there, in France, it was the human collective that stood at the center of 
interests, while here, in Germany, it was the human individual. We must note, as 
well, that anthropological materialism attained sharper definition in Germany 
because its opposite, idealism, was more clearly delineated over there. The his- 
tory of anthropological materialism stretches, in Germany, from Jean Paul to 
Keller (passing through Georg Biichner and Gutzkow) ; in France, die socialist 
Utopias and the physiologies are its precipitate. [W8,l] 

Madame de Cardoville, a grande dame in Le J uif errant <The Wandering Jew >, is 
a Fourierist. [W8,2] 

In connection with Fourierist pedagogy, one should perhaps investigate the dia- 
lectic of the example: although the example as model (in the moralists' sense) is 
pedagogically worthless, if not disastrous, the gestic example can become the 
object of a controllable and progressively assimilable imitation, one that pos- 
sesses the greatest significance. [W8,3] 

"La Phalange, journal de la science sociale (1836-184 3), which appears three 
times a week, . . . will fade from the scene only when it can cede its place to a daily, 
La Democratic pacifi que (1843-1851). Here, the main idea ... is 'the organization 
of labor' through the association." Charles Benoist, "L'Homme de 1848," part 2, 
Revue des deux mondes (February 1, 1914), p. 645. [W8,4] 

From Nettement's discussion of Fourier: "In creating the present world, God re- 
served the right to change its outward aspect through subsequent creations. These 
creations are eighteen in number. Every creation is brought about by a conjunc- 
tion of austral Uuid and boreal fluid." The later creations, following on the first, 



can eventuate only in Harmony. Alfred Nettement, Histoire de la litterature 
franqaise sous le gouvernement dejuillet (Paris, 1859), vol. 2, p. 58. [W8,5] 



"According to him <Fourier>, souls transmigrate from body to body, and even 
from world to world. Each planet possesses a soul, which will go to animate some 
other, superior planet, carrying with it, as it does so, the souls of those people who 
have inhabited it. It is thus that, before the end of our planet earth (which is 
supposed to endure 81,000 years), the human souls upon it will have gone through 
1,620 existences; they will have lived a total of 27,000 years on earth and 54,000 
years on another planet. ... In the exertions of its earliest infancy, the earth was 
struck by a putrid fever that eventually spread to the moon, which died as a result. 
But once organized in Harmony, the earth will resuscitate the moon." Nettement, 
Histoire de la litterature franqaise sous le gouvernement dejuillet, vol. 2, pp. 57, 



The Fourierist on the subject of aviation: "The buoyant aerostat ... is the chariot 
of fi re, which . . . respects above all the works of God; it does not need to aggrade 
the valleys or tunnel through mountains in imitation of the murderous locomotive, 
which the speculator has dishonored." A. Toussenel, Le Monde des oiseaux, vol. 1 



"It is impossible . . . that zebras, quaggas, hemiones, and pygmy ponies, who know 
they are destined to serve as steeds for the children's cavalry of the future, are 
sympathetic with the policy of our statesmen, who treat as merely Utopian the 
equestrian institutions where these animals are to hold a position of honor. . . . 
The lion likes nothing better . . . than having its nails trimmed, provided it is a 
pretty girl that wields the scissors." A. Toussenel, Le Monde des oiseaux: Orni- 
thologie passionnelle, vol. 1 (Paris, 1853), pp. 19-20. The author sees in woman 
the intermediary between human and animal. [W8a,2] 

Memorable letter from Victor Cousin to Jean Journet, in response to writings 
sent liim by the latter. It is dated October 23, 1843, and concludes: "When you 
are suffering, think not of social regeneration but of God, . . . who did not create 
man only for happiness but for an end quite otherwise sublime." The prefacer 
adds: "We would have consigned this little anecdote to oblivion, had not this 
poor letter . . . , a true masterpiece of perfect ignorance, summed up . . . the 
political science ... of a coterie that, for the past twenty-one years, has overseen 
. . . the fortunes of our country." Jean Journet, Poesies et chants harmoniens (Paris, 
1857), pp. xxvi-xxvii (editor's preface). [W8a,3] 

"The history of the . . . human races on Jupiter and Saturn teaches us that civili- 
zation ... is on its way to guarantism ... by virtue of the political equality be- 
tween man and woman, and from guarantism to Harmony through the recognition 
of the superiority of woman." A. Toussenel, Le Monde des oiseaux, vol. 1 (Paris, 



59. 



[W8,6] 



(Paris, 1853), p. 6. 



[W8a,l] 



1853), p. 131. 



[W8a,4] 



Fourier's long-tailed men became the object of caricature, in 1849, with erotic 
drawings by Emy in Le Rire. For the purpose of elucidating the Fourierist extrava- 
gances, we may adduce the figure of Mickey Mouse, in which we find carried 
out, entirely in the spirit of Fourier's conceptions, the moral mobilization of 
nature. Humor, here, puts politics to the test. Mickey Mouse shows how right 
Marx was to see in Fourier, above all else, a great humorist. The cracking open of 
natural teleology proceeds in accordance with the plan of humor. ( W8a,5] 

Affiliation of anti-Semitism with Fourierism. In 1845, Les Juifs rois <The Jewish 
Kings>, by Toussenel, appears. Toussenel is, moreover, the partisan of a "demo- 
cratic royalty." [W8a,6] 

"The line . . . generally associated with the family group is the parabola. This 
postulate is demonstrated in the work of the Old Masters, and above all in 
Raphael. . . . From the approximation of this grouping to the parabolic type, there 
results, in the oeuvre of Raphael, a hymn to the family, . . . masterful and . . . 
divine. . . . The master thinker, who determined the analogies of the four conic 
sections, has recognized the correspondence of the parabola and of familyism. 
And here we find the confirmation of this proposition in the prince of painters, in 
Raphael." D. Laverdant, De la Mission de I'art et du role des artistes: Salon de 
1845 (Paris, 1845), p. 64. [W9,l] 

Delvau (Les Dessous de Paris < Paris, 1860 >, p. 27) sees connections between 
Fourier and Restif de La Bretonne. [W9,2] 

Highly characteristic of the relation of the Fourierists to the Saint-Simonians is 
Considerant's polemic against the railroads. Tliis polemic relies, for the most 
part, on Hoene Wronski, Sur la Barbarie des chemins de fer et sur la reforme 
scientifique de la locomotion. Wronski's first objection is directed against the system 
of iron rails; Considerant indicts "the process operating under the name 'railway 
system,' that is to say, the construction of very long flat roads equipped with 
metallic rails and requiring enormous amounts of money and labor — a process 
'not only opposed to the actual progress of civilization, but contrasting all the 
more strongly with this progress in that it presents something truly ridiculous: 
the barbarous contemporary reproduction of the massive and inert roadways of 
the Romans' (Petition aux Chambres, p. 11)." Considerant opposes the "barbarous 
means," which is "simplistic," to the "scientific means," which is "composite" 
(pp. 40-41). At another point, he says explicitly: "For this simplisme has led, just 
as one would expect, to a result that is completely barbarian: that of the ever 
more ineluctable leveling of roads" (p. 44). By the same token: "Horizontality is a 
proper condition when it is a question of communications over water. The sys- 
tem of terrestrial locomotion, on the other hand, evidently ought to be capable of 
putting . . . different elevations in communication with one another" (p. 53). A 
second and related objection of Wronski's is directed against travel on wheels, 
which he describes as "a well-known and extremely vulgar process . . . , in use 



since the invention of the chariot." Here, too, he stresses the lack of any genuine 
scientific and complex character. Victor Considerant, Deraison et dangers de I'en- 
gouement pour les chemins en fer (Paris, 1838). The contents first appeared, in large 
part, in La Phalange. [W9,3] 

Considerant argues that the work of engineers should he focused not on the im- 
provement of the track hut on the improvement of the means of transport. Wron- 
ski, to whom he refers, appears to be thinking primarily of an improved form of 
wheel or of its replacement by something else. Thus, Considerant writes: "Is it not 
clear . . . that the discovery of a machine that would facilitate locomotion over 
ordinary routes, and increase . . . the present speed of transportation on these 
routes, would devastate, from top to hottom, the entire enterprise of the rail- 
roads? . . . Hence, a discovery not only possible but indeed probable can annihi- 
late, at one blow and forever, the extraordinary amounts of capital that some 
people have proposed be sunk into the railway system!" Victor Considerant, 
Deraison et dangers de Vengouement pour les chemins en fer (Paris, 1838), p. 63. 

[W9a,l] 



"The operation of railroads . . . forced humanity into the position of comhating 
nature's works everywhere on earth, of filling up valleys and hreaching moun- 
tains, . . . of struggling finally, by means of a general system, against the natural 
conditions of the planet's terrain, . . . and replacing them universally by the oppo- 
site sort of conditions." Victor Considerant, Deraison et dangers de Vengouement 
pour les chemins en fer (Paris, 1838), pp. 52-53. [W9a,2] 

Charles Gide on the "divinatory genius" of Fourier : "When he writes: 'A certain 
vessel from London arrives in China today; tomorrow the planet Mercury, having 
been advised of the arrivals and movements of ships by the astronomers of Asia, 
will transmit the list to the astronomers of London,' and if we transpose this 
prophecy into current vernacular so that it reads, 'When a ship arrives in China, 
the T. S. F. will transmit the news to the Eiffel Tower or to London,' then it is clear, 
I believe, that we have here an extraordinary anticipation. For what he means to 
say is precisely this: the planet Mercury is there to represent a force, as yet un- 
known, which would enahle the transmission of messages — a force of which he has 
had a presentiment." Charles Gide, Fourier precurseur de la cooperation (Paris 
<1924>),p. 10-11." [W9a,3] 

Charles Gide on Fourier's nonsensical astrological speculations: "He tells us that 
the planets Juno, Ceres, and Pallas each produce a species of gooseherry, and that 
there ought to he a fourth and still more excellent kind, of which we are deprived 
because the planet Phoebe (the moon), which would have generated it, is unfortu- 
nately dead." Charles Gide, Fourier precurseur de la cooperation (Paris), p. 10. 111 

[W9a,4] 



"When he speaks ... of a celestial army which the Sidereal Council has resolved to 
send to the aid of Humanity, an army already dispatched some 1,700 years ago and 



having bef ore it more than 300 years of travel until it arrives in the conn nes of our 
solar system, ... we shudder a little at the hint of Apocalypse. In other places this 
lunacy is more amiable, bordering often on wisdom, abounding in fine and witty 
observations, a bit like the harangues on the topic of the Golden Age that Don 
Quixote in the Sierra Morena addressed to the astonished goatherds." Charles 
Gide, Fourier precurseur de la cooperation (Paris), p. II. 19 [WU,1] 

"One could say, and he says it himself, that his observatory — or his laboratory, if 
you prefer — is the kitchen. It is his point of departure for radiating into all the 
domains of social life." Charles Gide, Fourier precurseur de la cooperation 



On the theory of attraction: "Bernardin de Saint-Pierre denied the force of grav- 
ity .. . because it signified an infringement on the free exercise of providence; and 
the astronomer Laplace struggled ... no less violently . . . against the fanciful 
generalizations of this force. But that did not prevent the doctrines of an Azais and 
like-minded others . . . from finding their imitators. Henri de Saint-Simon . . . was 
occupied for years with the elaboration of a system of 'universal gravitation,' and 
in 1810 he came out with the following credo: 'I believe in God. I believe that God 
created the universe. I believe that God made the universe subject to the law of 
gravitation.' Fourier likewise founded . . . his . . . system on the 'force of universal 
attraction,' of which sympathy between one man and another is said to be but a 
special case." Ernst Robert Curtius, Balzac (Bonn, 1923), p. 45 (Azai's, 1766- 
1845, Des Compensations dans les destinees humaines). [Wl0,3] 

Relation of the Communist Manifesto to the draft by Engels: "The organization of 
labor (a concession to Louis Blanc) and the construction, on state-owned lands, of 
large communal palaces designed to bridge the gap between city and country (a 
concession to the Fourierists of the Democratic Pacifique) were items which de- 
rived from Engels' draft and which the final version of the manifesto left out." 
Gustav Mayer, Friedrich Engels, vol. 1, Friedrich Engels in seiner Friihzeit, 2nd 



Engels on Fourier: '"It is Morgan's work which throws into bold relief the whole 
hrilliance of Fourier's critique of civilization,' he announced to Kautsky while 
working on his Ursprungder Familie. In this book itself, however, he wrote: 'The 
lowest interests . . . usher in the new, civilized society, the class-based society. The 
most outrageous means . . . topple the old, classless, gentile society."' Cited in 
Gustav Mayer, Friedrich Engels, vol. 2, Engels unci der Aufstieg der Arbeiter- 
bewegung in Europa (Berlin <1933>), p. 439. a0 [WlOa,l] 

Marx on Proudhon, in a letter to Kugelmann, October 9, 1866: "His sham criti- 
cism and sham opposition to the Utopians (he himself is only a petty-bourgeois 
Utopian, whereas in the Utopias of a Fourier, an Owen, and others, there is the 
anticipation and imaginative expression of a new world) attracted and corrupted 
first the jeunesse brilliante, the students, and then the workmen, particularly 



(Paris), p. 20. 



[W10.2] 



cd. (Berlin <1933>), p. 288. 



[W10.4] 



those of Paris, who, as workers in luxury trades, are strongly attached, without 
knowing it, to the old ruhhish." Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, Ausgeiviihlte 
Brief, ed. Adoratski (Moscow and Leningrad, 1934) <p. 174> . 21 [Wl0a,2] 



"When property has been abolished throughout Germany, these ultra-clever Ber- 
liners will set up a Democratic Pacifique on the Hasenheide. . . . Watch out! A new 
Messiah will presently arise in the Uckermark — a Messiah who will tailor Fourier 
to accord with Hegel, erect a phalanstery upon the eternal categories, and lay it 
down as an eternal law of the self -developing idea that capital, talent, and labor all 
have a definite share in the product. This will be the New Testament of Hegelian- 
ism; old Hegel will be the Old Testament; the 'state,' the law, will be a 'taskmaster 
over Christ'; and the phalanstery, in which the privies are located in accordance 
with logical necessity, will be the 'new Heaven' and the 'new Earth,' the new 
Jerusalem descending from heaven decked out like a bride." Engels to Marx, 
Barmen, November 19, 1844, in Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, Briefivechsel, 
vol. 1, 1844-1853, ed. Marx-Engels-Lenin Institut (Moscow and Leningrad, 1935), 
p. II. 22 [W10a,3] 

Only in the summery middle of the nineteenth century, only under its sun, can 
one conceive of Fourier's fantasy materialized. [W10a,4] 

"Cultivate in children the sharp ears of a rhinoceros or a cossack." Ch. Fourier, 
he Nouveau Monde industriel et societaire, ou Invention du procede d'industrie 
attrayante et naturelle distribute en series passionnees (Paris, 1829), p. 207. 

[W10a,5] 

One readily grasps the importance of the culinary in Fourier; happiness has its 
recipes like any pudding. It is realized on the basis of a precise measuring out of 
different ingredients. It is an effect. Landscape, for example, signifies nothing to 
Fourier. He has no feeling for its romantic aspect; the miserable huts of the 
peasantry arouse his indignation. But let "composite agriculture" move into the 
area, let the little "hordes" and the little "bands" 33 spread out across it, let the 
noisy military marches of the industrial army play over its surface, and we have 
arrived at that proportion of elements needed for happiness to result. [Wll,l] 

The kinship between Fourier and Sade resides in the constructive moment that is 
proper to all sadism. Fourier conjoins the play of colors of the imagination in a 
unique way with the play of numbers of his idiosyncrasy. It must be emphasized 
that Fourier's harmonies are not dependent on any of the traditional number- 
mysticisms, like that of Pythagoras or of Kepler. They are altogether his concep- 
tion, and they give to the harmony something inaccessible and protected: they 
surround the hartnoniens as though with barbed wire. The happiness of the 
phalanstery is a bonheur barbele. On the other hand, Fourierist traits can be 
recognized in Sade. The experiences of the sadists, as presented in his 120 Jours 
de Sodome, are, in their cruelty, exactly that extreme that is touched by the 



extreme idyllic of Fourier. Les extremes se touclient. The sadist, in his experiments, 
could chance on a partner who longs for just those punishments and humiliations 
which his tormentor inflicts. All at once, he could be standing in the midst of one 
of those harmonies sought after by the Fourierist Utopia. ( Wl 1 ,2] 

Simplism appears in Fourier as the mark of "civilization." ( Wll,3] 

According to Fourier, the people in the vicinity of Paris, Blois, and Tours are 
especially suited to put their children into the trial phalanstery. The lower classes 
there are particularly well bred. See Le Nouveau Monde, p. 209. [ Wlla,l] 

Fourier's system, as he himself explains, rests on two discoveries: that of attrac- 
tion and that of the four movements (material, organic, animal, and social). 

[Wlla,2] 

Fourier speaks of a transmission miragique which will make it possible for London 
to have news from India within four hours. See Fourier, La Fausse Industrie 
(Paris, 1836), vol. 2, p. 711. [Wlla,3] 

"The social movement is the pattern for the three others. The animal, organic, and 
material movements are coordinated with the social movement, which is primary. 
This means that the properties of an animal, a vegetable, a mineral, or even a 
vortex of stars represent an effect of the human passions in the social order, and 
that everything, from atoms to stars, is an image of the properties of the human 
passions." Charles Fourier, Theorie des quatre mouvements (Paris, 1841), p. 47. 21 

[Wlla,4] 

The contemplation of maps was one of Fourier's favorite occupations. [Wlla,5] 

Messianic timetable: 1822, preparation of the experimental canton; 1823, its open- 
ing and trial run; 1824, its imitation in all civilized nations; 1825, recruitment of 
the barbarians and savages; 1826, organization of the spherical hierarchy; 1826, 
dispatching of colonial squadrons. — The phrase hierarchie spherique should be 
taken to mean the "distribution of the scepters of sovereignty" (according to 
E. SiJherling, Dictionnaire de sociologie phalansterienne [Paris, 1911], p. 214 ). 

[Wlla,6] 

The model of the phalanstery comprises 1,620 persons — in other words, a male 
and a female exemplar of each of the 810 characters that, according to Fourier, 
exhaust all possibilities. [Wl la, 7] 

In 1828, the poles were to become ice free. [Wlla,8] 



"The soul of man is an emanation of the great planetary soul, his body a portion of 
the planet's body. When a man dies, his body dissolves into the body of the planet 



and his soul fades into the planetary soul." F. Armand and R. Mauhlanc, Fourier 
(Paris, 1937), vol. 1, p. 111. [Wlla,9] 



"All children have the following dominant tastes: (1) Ferreting, or the penchant 
for handling things, exploring, running around, and constantly changing activi- 
ties. (2) Industrial din, the taste for noisy jobs. (3) Aping, or the imitative mania. 
(4) Working on a miniature scale, the taste for little workshops. (5) Progressive 
enticement of the weak by the strong." Charles Fourier, Le Nouveau Monde indus- 
triel et societaire (Paris, 1829), p. 213. 25 [ W12,1] 

Two of the twenty-four "Sources for the blossoming of vocations": (3) The lure of 
hierarchical ornaments. A plume already suffices to bewitch one of our villagers to 
such an extent that he is ready to sign away his liherty. What, then, wiJl be the 
effect of a hundred honorific adornments in the effort to enroll a child in the 
pleasurahle association with his fellows? . . . (17) Harmony of materiel, or the uni- 
tary maneuver — something unknown in the workshops of civilization, but prac- 
ticed in those of Harmony, where it is performed by the ensemble of soldiers and 
choreographers in a manner delightful to all children." Charles Fourier, Le Nou- 
veau Monde industriel et societaire (Paris, 1829), pp. 215, 216. [W12,2] 

Very characteristic that Fourier wants much more to keep the father away from 
the education of his children than the mother. "Disobedience toward the father 
and the teacher is ... a perfectly natural impulse; and the child wants to com- 
mand rather than obey the father." Charles Fourier, Le Nouveau Monde industriel 
et societaire (Paris, 1829), p. 219. 26 [W12.3] 

Hierarchy of children: juveniles, gymnasians, lyceans, seraphim, cherubs, ur- 
chins, imps, weanlings, nurslings. The children are the only one of the "three 
sexes" that can enter "straightaway into the heart of harmony." [W12,4] 

"Among the imps, we do not distinguish the two sexes by means of contrasting 
attire, like trousers and petticoat; that would be to risk stunting the growth of 
vocations and falsifying the proportion of the two sexes in each function." Fourier, 
Le Nouveau Monde industriel et societaire (Paris, 1829), pp. 223-224 (imps: ages 
one and a half to three; urchins: ages three to four and a half). [W12,5] 

Tools in seven sizes. Industrial hierarchy of children: officers of various types, 
licentiates, bachelors, neophytes, aspirants. [W12,6] 

Fourier conceives the departure for work in the fields as a sort of country outing, 
hi large wagons and with music. [W12,7] 

Qualifying examination for the choir of cheruhim: (1) Musical and choreographic 
audition at the Opera. (2) Washing of 120 plates in half an hour, without breaking 
one. (3) Peeling of half a quintal of apples in a given space of time, without allowing 



the weight of the fruit to drop helow a certain level. (4) Perfect sifting of a quantity 
of rice or other grain in a fi xed period of time. (5) Skill in kindling and screening a 
fire with intelligence and celerity." Charles Fourier, Le NouveauMonde industriel 
et societaire (Paris, 1829), p. 231. [W12a,l] 

Fourier unveils "the prospect of attaining, at the age of twelve or thirteen, to a post 
of high dignity, such as commanding ten thousand men in a military or parade 
maneuver." Fourier, Le Nouveau Monde industriel et societaire (Paris, 1829), 
p. 234. [W12a,2] 

Names of children in Fourier: Nysas, Enryale. The educator: Hilarion. [W12a,3] 

"And so it is that, from his childhood on, a man is not compatible with simple 
nature; there is needed, for his education, a vast array of instrnments, a multi- 
grade and variegated apparatus, and this applies from the moment he lirst leaves 
the cradle. J .-.J. Rousseau has denounced this prison in which the infant is pin- 
ioned, but he could not have known of the system of elastic mats, of the combined 
attentions and distractions, that would be enlisted in support of this method. 
Thus, the philosophers, in the face of evil, know only to oppose their sterile decla- 
mations, instead of building a road to the good — a system of roads that, far re- 
moved from simple nature, results only from composite methods." Fourier, Le 
Nouveau Monde industriel et societaire (Paris, 1829), p. 237. The "distractions" 
involve, among other things, letting neighboring children play with one another in 



hammocks. [W12a,4] 

Napoleon III belonged to a Fourierist group in 184.8. [W12a,5] 

The Fourierist colony founded hy Baudet-Dulary in 1833 still exists today in the 
form of a family-run pension. Fourier had disavowed it in his day. [W12a,6] 

Balzac knew and admired Fourier's work. [W12a,7] 



The flag of the phalanstery displayed the seven colors of the rainbow. Note by 
Rene Maublanc: "The colors are analogous to the passions. ... By juxtaposing a 
series of tables wherein Fourier compares the passions to colors, to notes of the 
scale, to natural rights, to mathematical operations, to geometric curves, to met- 
als, and to heavenly bodies, one linds, for example, that love corresponds to hlue, 
to the note mi, to right of pasture, to division, to the ellipse, to tin, and to the 
planets." F. Armand and R . Mauhlanc, Fourier (Paris, 1937), vol. 1, pp. 227-228. 

[W12a,8] 

Re Toussenel: "Fourier . . . claims to 'join together and enframe, within a single 
plan, the societary mechanics of the passions with the other known harmonies of 
the universe,' and for that, he adds, 'we need only have recourse to the amusing 
lessons to be drawn from the most fascinating objects among the animals and 



plants.'" Armand and Maublanc, Fourier (Paris, 1937), vol. 1, p. 227; citing 
Fourier, Traite de Vassociation domestique-agricole (Paris and London, 1822), 
vol. 1, pp. 24—25, and Theorie de Vunite universelle (1834), p. 31. [W13,1] 



Fourier reproaches Descartes with having, in his doubt, spared "that tree of lies 
one calls civilization." See he Nouveau Monde, p. 367. [W13,2] 

Stylistic quirks reminiscent of Jean Paul. Fourier loves preambles, cisamhles, 
transambles, postambles, introductions, extroductions, prologues, interludes, 
postludes, cismediants, mediants, transmediants, intermedes, notes, appendixes. 

[W13,3] 

Fourier appears very suggestive before the background of the Empire in this 
note: "The combined order will, from the outset, be as brilliant as it has been 
long deferred. Greece, in the age of Solon and Pericles, was already in a position 
to undertake it, having a degree of luxury sufficient to proceed to this form of 
organization." Armand and Maublanc, Fourier (Paris, 1937), vol. 1, pp. 261-262; 
citing Iraite de ['association domestique-agricole (Paris and London, 1822), vol.1, 
pp. lxi-lxii; Theorie de Vunite universelle (1834), vol.1, p. Ib'f [W13,4] 

Fourier recognizes many forms of collective procession and cavalcade: storm, 
vortex, swarm, serpentage. [W13,5] 

With 1,600 phalansteries, the association is already deployed in all its combina- 
tions. [W13.6] 

"Fourier put himself body and soul into his work because he could not put into it 
the needs of a revolutionary class, which did not yet exist." F. Armand and 
R. Maublanc, Fourier (Paris, 1937), vol. 1, p. 83. It should be added that Fourier 
appears, at many points, to prefigure a new type of human being, one conspicu- 
ous for its harmlessness. 28 [W13,7] 

"In his room, there was ordinarily but one free pathway, right in the middle, 
leading from door to window. The rest of the space was entirely taken up hy his 
flowerpots, which offered in themselves the spectacle of a progressive series of 
sizes, shapes, and even qualities; there were pots of common clay, and there were 
pots of Chinese porcelain." Charles Pellarin, Vie de Fourier (Paris, 1871), pp. 32- 
33. [W13.8] 



Charles Pellarin, Vie de Fourier (Paris, 1871) reports (p. 144) that Fourier would 
sometimes go six or seven nights without sleeping. This happened hecause of ex- 
citement over his discoveries. [ Wl3a,l] 



"The phalanstery will be an immense lodging house." (Fourier had no conception 
of family life.) F. Armand and R. Manblanc, Fourier (Paris, 1937), vol.1, p. 85. 

[Wl3a,2] 

The cabalist, the composite, and the butterfly form appear under the rubric "dis- 
tributives," or <passions> mecanisantes. <SeeW15a,2.> [W13a,3] 

"The cabalist spirit always brings selfish motives into play with passion. All is 
calculation with the intriguer — the least gesture, a wink of the eye. Everything is 
done on reflection and with alacrity." Theorie de I'unite universelle (1834), vol. 1, 
p. 145. 2(! This remark shows very clearly how Fourier takes account of egoism. 
(In the eighteenth century, workers who agitated were called cabaleurs) 

[Wl3a,4] 

"The earth copulating with itself engenders the cherry; with Mercury, the straw- 
berry; with Pallas, the black currant; with Juno, the raisin; and so on." Armand 
and Manblanc, Fourier (Paris, 1937), vol. 1, p . 114. [ Wl3a,5] 

"A series is a regular classification of a genus, species, or group of beings or of 
objects, arranged symmetrically with respect to one or several of their properties, 
and on both sides proceeding from a center or pivot, according to an ascending 
progression on one side, descending on the other, like two flanks of an army. . . . 
There are 'open' series, in which the world (!) of subdivisions is not determined, 
and 'measured' series, which comprehend, at various levels, 3, 12, 32, 134, 404 
subdivisions." Armand and Maublanc, Fourier (Paris, 1937), vol. 1, p. 127. 

[Wl3a,6] 

According to Fourier, every passion corresponds to an organ of the human body. 

[Wl3a,7] 

"In Harmony . . . the relations arising from the series are so dynamic that one has 
little time for remaining in one's room." Cited in Armand and Maublanc, Fourier 
(Paris, 1937), vol. 2, p. 211. [Wl3a,8] 

The four "sources of virtue" in the Little Hordes: "These sources are the penchant 
for dirt, and the feelings of pride, impudence, and insubordination." Fourier, he 
Nouveau Monde industriel et societaire (Paris, 1829), p. 246. 30 [W14,1] 

Work signal of the Little Hordes: "The charge of the Little Hordes is sounded in an 
uproar of bells, chimes, drums, and trumpets, a howling of dogs and a bellowing of 
bulls. Then the Hordes, led by their Khans and Druids, rush forward with a great 
shout, passing before the priests, who sprinkle them with holy water. . . . The 
Little Hordes should be associated with the priesthood as members of a religious 
brotherhood. When performing their work, they should wear a religious symbol 



... on their clothing." "Although the Little Hordes perform the most difficult 
tasks . . . , they receive the least remuneration. They would accept nothing at all if 
that were permitted in association. . . . All authorities, even monarchs, owe the 
first salute to the Little Hordes. With their pygmy horses, the Little Hordes com- 
prise the globe's foremost regiments of cavalry; no industrial army can begin a 
campaign without them. They also have the prerogative of initiating all work done 
in the name of unity." Charles Fourier, Le Nouveau Monde industrielet societaire 
(Paris, 1829), p. 247-248 and 244-246. :tl [W14,2] 

"Manoeuvre tartare — or curvilinear mode" of the Little Hordes, in contrast to the 
"manoeuvre moderne — or rectilinear mode" of the Little Bands. "The Horde re- 
sembles a square bed of variegated tulips: one hundred cavaliers will together 
display two hundred colors, artistically contrasted." Fourier, Le Nouveau Monde, 
p. 249." [W14.3] 

"Whoever shall abuse quadrupeds, birds, fish or insects, either by hard usage or 
by unnecessary cruelty, will he liable to the tribunal of the Little Hordes. And 
whatever his age may he, he would be brought before this tribunal of children, and 
treated as inferior in moral sentiment to children themselves." Fourier, Le Nou- 
veau Monde (Paris, 1829), p . 248/™ [ W14,4] 

The Little Hordes are obliged to look after the Concorde sociale; the Little Bands, 
the charme social. [W14,5] 

"The Little Hordes will come to the beautiful by way of the good, by speculative 
defilement." Fourier, Le Nouveau Monde, p. 255. M [W14.6] 

"Just as the Little Hordes have their Druids and Druidesses, the Little Bands have 
their own adult associates, who are known as Coryhants. They also have their own 
allies among the groups of voyagers who travel about Harmony. Whereas the Little 
Hordes are allied to the big hordes of Adventurers and Adventuresses, who belong 
to the industrial armies, the Little Bands are associated with the big hands of 
Knights and Ladies Errant, who are dedicated to the fine arts." Fourier, Le Nou- 
veau Monde (Paris, 1829), p. 254. :ir> [ W14 a ,l] 

The Little Bands have jurisdiction over offenses against meadows and gardens, 
and over questions of language. [W14a,2] 

"If the vestalate is called upon to mislead the minds of the children concerning 
sexual relations, the tact manifest in the use of two sets of genital-urinary appara- 
tus leaves the child in complete ignorance of sex." E. Silberling, Dictionnaire de 
sociologie phalansterienne (Paris, 1911), p. 424 (s.v. "tact"). Likewise, the cour- 
tesy of the hoys toward the girls in the Little Bands is designed to mask the meaning 
of gallant behavior among adults. [W14a,3] 



"Under the term 'opera' I comprehend all choreographic exercises, including 
those of the rifle and the censer." Fourier, Le Nouveau Monde industriel et so- 
cietaire (Paris, 1829), p . 260. [ W14a,4] 



The phalanstery is organized like a land of milk and honey. Even amusements 
(hunting, fishing, making music, growing flowers, performing in theatricals) are 
remunerated. [W14a,5] 

Fourier does not know the concept of exploitation. [W14a,6] 

In reading Fourier, one is reminded of the sentence by Karl Kxaus: "I preach wine 
and drink water." [W14a,7] 

Bread plays only a small role in the diet of the Harmoniens. [W14a,8] 

"The initiation of barbarians in the use of tactics is one of the signs of the degen- 
eration ... of civilization." E. Silberling, Dictionnaire de sociologie phalan- 
sterienne (Paris, 1911), p. 424 (s.v. "tactics"). [W14a,9] 

"The savage enjoys seven natural rights . . . : hunting, fishing, harvesting, pas- 
ture, external theft (that is, pillaging of what helongs to other tribes), the federal 
league (the intrigues and cabals internal to the tribe), and insouciance." Armand 
and Maublanc, Fourier (Paris, 1937), vol. 2, p. 78. [W14a,li] 

The poor man speaks: "I ask to be advanced the necessary tools . . . and enough to 
live on, in exchange for the right to steal which simple nature has given me." Cited 
in Armand and M aublanc, Fourier (Paris, 1937), vol. 2, p. 82. [W15.1] 

In the phalanstery, a caravansary is outfitted for the reception of foreigners. A 
structure characteristic of the phalanstery is the "tower of order." ITiis building 
houses the optical telegraph, the control center for the signal lights, and the 
carrier pigeons. [W15.2] 

The circulation of works useful to all the phalansteries amounts to 800,000 copies. 
Fourier thinks, above all, of publishing an Encyclopaedic naturologique calu- 
minee. [W15,3] 

Fourier loves to clothe the most reasonable sentiments in fanciful considerations. 
His discourse resembles a higher flower language. 3 " [W15,4] 

Fourier would like to see the people who serve no useful purpose in civilization — 
those who merely gad about in search of news to communicate — circulating 
among the tables of the Hannonians, so as to keep people there from losing time 
in reading newspapers: a divination of radio, born from the study of human 
character. [W15.5] 



Fourier: "Every calling has its countermorality and its principles." Cited in Ar- 
mand and Maublanc, Fourier (Paris, 1937), vol. 2, p. 97. Fourier mentions, as 
examples, le monde galant and the world of domestic servants. [W15,6] 



"After three generations of Harmony, two-thirds of the women will he unfruitful, 
as is the case with all flowers which, by the refinements of cultivation, have been 
raised to a high degree of perfection." Fourier, La Fausse Industrie (Paris, 1835- 
1836), vol. 2, pp. 560-561. 37 [W15,7] 

The voluntary submissiveness of the savage, with his seven natural rights, would 
be, according to Fourier, the touchstone of civilization. It is something first ob- 
tained in Harmony. [W15,8] 

"The individual ... is a being essentially false, for neither by himself alone nor 
with another can he bring about the development of the twelve passions, since 
these comprise a mechanism of 810 keys and their complements. It is therefore 
with the passional vortex alone that the scale begins, and not with the individual 
person." Publication des manuscrits de Fourier, 4 vols. (Paris, 1851-1858), 1857- 
1858, p. 320. [W15,9] 

After 70,000 years comes the end of Harmony, in the form of a new period of 
civilization, in descending tendency, which once more will give way to "obscure 
limbs." Thus, with Fourier, transience and happiness are closely linked. Engels 
observes: 'Just as Kant introduced into natural science the idea of the ultimate 
destruction of the earth, Fourier introduced into historical science that of the 
ultimate destruction of the human race." Engels, Anti-Diihring, part 3, p. 12. 38 

[Wl5a,l] 

The mechanics of the passions: "The tendency to harmonize the five sensual pas- 
sions — (1) taste, (2) touch, (3) sight, (4) hearing, (5) smell — with the four affective 
passions — (6) friendship, (7) ambition, (8) love, (9) paternity. This harmony takes 
place through the medium of three little-known and abused passions, which I shall 
call: (10) the cabalist, (11) the butterfly, (12) the composite." Cited from Le Nou- 
veau Monde, in Armand and Maublanc, Fourier (Paris, 1937), vol. 1, p. 242. M 

[Wl5a,2] 



"A large number of universes (since one universe, along with man and planet, 
constitutes the third echelon, . . . Fourier calls it a "tri-verse") go to form a quatri- 
verse; and so on, up to the octi- verse, which represents . . . nature as a whole, the 
totality of the heings of Harmony. Fourier enters into some minute calculations 
and announces that the octi-verse is composed of 10 90 universes." Armand and 
Maublanc, Fourier (Paris, 1937), vol. 1, p. 112. [Wl5a,3] 

On "beautiful agriculture": "This plow that today is so despised will be taken up 
hy the young prince, just as by the young pleheian; they will together compete in a 



sort of industrial tournament, where each of the athletes will test his vigor and 
dexterity, and where each can show off to an audience of lovelies, who will hring 
the festivities to a close by serving lunch or a snack." Charles Fourier, Traite de 
I'association domestique-agricole (Paris and London, 1822), vol. 2, p. 584. To this 
beau agricole belong, further, the steles that are raised on flower-covered pede- 
stals and the busts of deserving farm laborers or agriculturists placed on altars 
that are scattered through the fields. "These are the mythological demigods of the 
industrial sect or series." Cited in Armand and Maublanc, Fourier (Paris, 1937), 
vol. 2, p. 206. Offerings of incense are made to them through the Coryhants. 

[Wl5a,4] 

Fourier recommends gearing the experiment, in the trial phalanx, toward pre- 
cisely the most eccentric characters. [ Wl6,l] 

Fourier was a chauvinist: he hated Englishmen and Jews. He saw the Jews not as 
civilized people but as barbarians who maintained patriarchal customs. [W16,2] 

Fourier's apple — the pendant to that of Newton — which, in the Parisian restau- 
Kint Fevrier, costs a hundred times more than in the province where it is grown. 
Proudhon, too, compares himself to Newton. [Wl6,3] 

To the Harmonians, Constantinople is the capital of the earth. [ W16,4] 

Harmonians need very little sleep (like Fourier!). They live to the age of 150 at the 
very least. [W16,5] 

"The 'opera' stands at the forefront of educational directives. . . . The opera is a 
school of morality in outline: it is there that young people are imbued with a 
horror of anything prejudicial to truth, precision, and unity. At the opera, no 
favor can excuse the one whose note is false, whose timing, step, or gesture is off. 
The prince's child who has a part in the dance or the choir must endure the truth, 
must listen to the criticisms arising from the masses. It is at the opera that he 
learns, in every move he makes, to subordinate himself to unitary proprieties, to 
general accords." Cited in F. Armand and R. Mauhlanc, Fourier (Paris, 1937), 
vol. 2, pp. 232-233. [Wl6,6] 

"No one ever dreamed, in civilization, of perfecting that portion of our dress we 
call 'atmosphere.' . . . It does not suffice to change it merely in the rooms of certain 
idlers. . . . Wc must modify the atmosphere in general and systematically." Cited 
in F. Armand and R. Mauhlanc, Fourier (Paris, 1937), vol. 2, p. 145. [W16,7] 

Fourier's texts are rich in stereotypical locutions comparable to the gr*.dus ad 
parnassum. 19 Almost every time he speaks of the arcades, it is to say that, under 
present circumstances, even the king of France gets wet when he steps into his 
carriage during a rainstorm. [W16,8] 



Ten million francs would be needed for the erection of the complete phalanstery; 
three million, for the trial phalanstery. [Wl6,9] 



All flower beds of the Harmonians are "shielded" from too much sun and rain. 

[W16.10] 

Of the beauties of agriculture among the Harmonians, Fourier gives an account 
that reads like a description of color illustrations in children's books: "The socie- 
tary state will be able to establish, down to the most unsavory functions, a 
species-specific luxury. The gray overalls of a group of plowmen, the bluish 
overalls of a group of mowers, will be enhanced by the borders, belts, and plumes 
of their uniform, by glossy wagons and inexpensively adorned harnesses, all 
carefully arranged to protect die ornaments from the grime of work. If we should 
see, in a pretty vale of the medleyed English sort, all these groups in action, well 
sheltered by their colored tents, working in disseminated masses, circling about 
with flags and instruments, singing hymns in chorus while marching; and should 
the region be sprinkled with manor houses and belvederes enlivened by colon- 
nades and spires, instead of with thatched cottages, we would verily believe that 
the landscape was enchanted, that it was a fairyland, an Olympian abode." Even 
the rape cutters, who lack high standing with Fourier, have a part in the splendor, 
and are found "at work in the hills, raising their pavilions above thirty belvederes 
crowned with golden rape." Cited in Annand and Maublanc, Fourier (Paris, 
1937), vol. 2, pp. 203, 204. [Wl6a,l] 

Forming a mesh — for example, between herding, plowing, and gardening: "It is 
not necessary that this interchange be total — say, that all of the twenty men en- 
gaged in tending Hocks from 5:00 to 6:30 go off as a group to work in the iields from 
6:30 to 8:00. All that is necessary is for each series to provide the others with 
several members taken from its different groups. The exchange of a few members 
will suffice to establish a linkage or meshing between the different series." Cited in 
Armand and Maublanc, Fourier (Paris, 1937), vol. 2, pp. 160-161 ("Essor de la 
'papillomas'").-" [Wl6a,2] 

It is not just the despotism but also the moralism diat Fourier hates in the great 
Revolution. He presents the subde division of labor among Harmonians as the 
antidiesis of egalite, and their keen competition as an alternative to fraternite. 

[Wl6a,3] 

In Le Nouveau Monde industriel (pp. 281-282), Fourier's rancor against Pestalozzi 
is very evident. He says he took up Pestalozzi's "intuitive method" in his Traite 
<de I 'association domestique-agricole> of 1822 because of the great success it had had 
with the public. Lacking such popular success, it would have created an unfavor- 
able impression on its readers. — Of Yverdon he recounts, at best, tales of scandal 
calculated to prove diat institutions of harmony cannot be introduced with impu- 
nity into civilization. [Wl7,l] 



Under the heading "Le Garantisme d'oui'e" <The Guaranteeism of Hearing) , and 
in conjunction with the amelioration of popular speech habits and of the musical 
education of the people (worker-choirs of the theater of Toulouse!), Fourier treats 
of measures to he taken against noise. He wants the workshops isolated and, for 
the most part, transferred to the suburbs. [W17,2] 

Town-Planning: "A man who wishes to have a briJJiant drawing room is keenly 
aware that the heauty of the principal room cannot do without that of the avenues. 
What is one to think of an elegant salon that requires the visitor, on his way there, 
first to pass through a courtyard littered with refuse, a stairwell full of rubbish, 
and an antechamber provided with old and uncouth furnishings? . . . Why is it, 
then, that the good taste evinced by each individual in the decoration of his private 
abode is not met with, as well, in our architects responsible for those collective 
abodes known as cities? And why hasn't one of the myriad princes and artists . . . 
ever had the idea of adorning, in appropriate degree, the three components: fau- 
bourgs, annexes, and avenues . . . ?" Charles Fourier, Cites ouvrieres: Modifica- 
tions a introduire dans V architecture des villes (Paris, 1849), pp. 19-20. Among 
many other prescriptions for urban planning, Fourier imagines some that would 
allow one to recognize, from the increasing or decreasing decoration on the build- 
ings, whether one was approaching or moving away from a city. (W17,3] 

Barbarian, civilized, and harmonian town planning: "A harharian town is formed 
of buildings haphazardly assembled . . . and confusedly grouped along streets that 
are tortuous, narrow, hadly constructed, unsafe, and unhealthy. Such, in general, 
arc the cities of France. . . . Civilized towns have a monotonous, imperfect order, 
a checkerboard pattern, as in . . . Philadelphia, Amsterdam, Nancy, Turin, the 
new parts of London and Marseilles, and other cities which one knows by heart as 
soon as one has looked at three or four streets. Further inspection would be 
pointless and dispiriting." In contrast to this: "neutral harmony," "which recon- 
ciles incoherent order with a combined order." Fourier, Cites ouvrieres, pp. 17- 



18. [W17,4] 

The Harmonians neither acknowledge nor desire any holidays. [Wl7a,l] 

[n Die heilige Familie (where?) 42 Marx refers to Fourier. [Wl7a,2] 

Toussenel, in 1848, was among the founders of the Societe Rcpublicaine Centrale 
(Blauqui's club). [Wl7a,3] 



Claude-Nicolas Ledoux: "Like all the communal dwellings envisioned for Chaux, 
the hospice (a low-rise structure ringed by arcades and enclosing a square court- 
yard) has the task of furthering the moral elevation of humankind, insofar as it 
carefully tests the people it shelters, allows the good their freedom, and detains the 
bad for compulsory labor. To what extent the artist was gripped by the reformist 
ideas of those days can be seen in the peculiar project of the 'oikema.' Already 



quite eccentric in its outward aspect, this elongated building with its Greco-Roman 
vestibule and windowless walls was to be the place where a new sexual ethic was 
pioneered. To reach the goal of higher sexual morality, the spectacle of human 
dissipation in the oikema, in the house of uninhibited passions, was supposed to 
lead to the path of virtue and to 'Hymen's altar.' Later, the architect decided that 
it would be better ... to grant nature its rights. ... A new, more liberated form of 
marriage was to be instituted in the oikema, which the architect wanted to situate 
in the most beautiful of landscapes." Emil Kaufmann, Von Ledoux bis Le Cor- 
busier: Ursprung unci Entivicklung der autonomen Architektur (Vienna and 
Leipzig, 1933), p. 36. [Wl7a,4] 

"During a large part of his life, Grandville was much preoccupied with the general 
idea of Analogy." Ch. Baudelaire, Oeuvres, ed. Le Dantec, vol. 2 < Paris, 1932 >, 
p. 197 ("Quelques caricaturistes francais"). 4:l [Wl7a,5] 

H.J. Hunt, Le Socialisme et le Romantume en France: Etude de la presse socialiste de 
1830 a 1848 (Oxford, 1935), provides, on p. 122, a notably concise and felici- 
tous statement of the main lines of Fourier's doctrine. The Utopian element 
recedes into the background, and the proximity to Newton becomes clear. Pas- 
sion is the force of attraction as experienced in the subject; it is what makes 
"work" into a process as natural as the fall of an apple. [Wl7a,6] 

"In contrast to the Saint-Simonians, Fourier has no use for mysticism in aesthetic 
matters. In his general doctrine he is certaiidy mystical, Utopian, messianic if you 
will, but in speaking of art he never once utters the word 'priesthood.' . . . 'Vanity 
takes over and impels artists and scientists to sacrifice their fortune [which they 
would have needed to preserve their independence] to the phantoms of pride.'" 
H. J. Hunt, Le Socialisme et le Romantisme en France (Oxford, 1935), pp. 123- 
124. [W18] 