[Marx] 



The man who buys and sells reveals something about himself 
more direct and less composed than the man who discourses 
and battles. 

— Maxime Leroy, Les Speadations foncieres de Saint-Simon 
et ses querelles d'affaires avec son associe, le comte de Redern 
(Paiis<1925>),p. 1 



"We see how the history of industry and the established objective existence of 
industry are the open hook of man's essential powers. . . . Hitherto this was con- 
ceived not in its inseparable connection with man's essential being, but only in an 
external relation of utility. . . . Industry is the actual historical relationship of 
nature — and therefore of natural science — to man." Karl Marx, "Nationalokono- 
mie und Philosophic" (1844) [Karl Marx, Dev historische Materialismus, ed. 
Landshut and Mayer (Leipzig <1932>), vol. 1, pp. 303-304]. 1 [XI, 1] 

"Not only wealth hut, likewise, the poverty of man — under the assumption of 
socialism — receives, in equal measure, a human and therefore social significance. 
Poverty is the positive bond which causes the human being to experience the 
greatest wealth — the other human heing — as need." Karl Marx, "Nationalokono- 
mie und Philosophie" [Karl Marx, Dev historische Materialismus, ed. Landshut 
and Mayer (Leipzig), vol. 1 , p. 305]. 2 [Xl,2] 

"The conclusion Marx draws for the capitalist economy: with the purchasing 
power given him in the form of salary, the worker can purchase only a certain 
amount of goods, whose production required just a fraction of the lahor he himself 
has provided. In other words, if the merchandise he produces is to be sold by his 
employer at a profit, he must always he expending surplus lahor." Henryk Gross- 
mann, "Fiinfzig Jahre Kampf um den Marxismus," Worterbuch dev Volkswirt- 
schaft, 4th ed., ed. Ludwig Elster, vol. 3 (Jena, 1933), p. 318. [Xl,3] 

Origin of false consciousness: "Division of lahor hecomes truly such only from the 
moment when a division of material and mental lahor appears. . . . From this 
moment onward, consciousness can really Hatter itself that it is something other 



than consciousness of existing practice, that it really represents something without 
representing something real." "Marx unci Engels iiber Feuerbach: Aus dem liter- 
arischen Nachlass von Marx unci Engels," in Marx-Engels Archiv, ed. D. Rjaza- 
nov, vol. 1 (Frankfurt am Main <1928>), p. 248. 1 [Xl,4] 

A passage on the Revolution as a "Last Judgment" opposed to the one Bruno 
Bauer dreamt of — one that would usher in the victory of critical consciousness: 
"The holy father of the church will be greatly surprised when judgment day over- 
takes him , . . . a day when the reflection of burning cities in the sky will mark the 
dawn; when together with the 'celestial harmonies' the tunes of "La Marseillaise" 
and "Carmagnole" will echo in his ears accompanied hy the requisite roar of 
cannon, with the guillotine beating time; when the infamous 'masses' will shout, 
"£a ira, ca ira!" and suspend <aufhebt> 'self-consciousness' by the lamppost." 
"Marx und Engels iiber Feuerhach: Aus dem literarischen Nachlass von Marx und 
Engels," in Marx-Engels Archiv, ed. D. Rjazanov, vol. 1 (Frankfurt am Main), 
p. 258." [Xl,5] 

Self -alienation: "The worker produces capital; capital produces him — hence, he 
produces himself, and . . . his human qualities exist only insofar as they exist for 
capital alien to him. . . . The worker exists as a worker only when he exists for 
himsel f as capital; and he exists as capital only when some capital exists for him. 
The existence of capital is his existence, . . . since it determines the tenor of his life 
in a manner indifferent to him. . . . Production . . . produce[s] man as a . . . 
dehumanized being." Karl Marx, Der historische Materialismus: Die Friih- 
schriften, ed. Landshut and Mayer (Leipzig), vol. 1, pp. 361-362 ("National- 
okonomie und Philosophic"). 5 [Xla,l] 

On the doctrine of revolutions as innervations of the collective: "The transcen- 
dence of private property is . . . the complete emancipation of all human 
senses . . . , but it is this emancipation . . . because . . . the senses and minds of 
other men have become my own appropriation. Besides these direct organs, there- 
fore, social organs develop . . . ; thus, for instance, activity in direct association 
with others . . . has become an organ for expressing my own life, and a mode of 
appropriating human life. It is obvious that the human eye enjoys things in a way 
different from that of the crude, nonhuman eye; the human ear different from the 
crude ear; and so on." Karl Marx, Der historische Materialismus: Die Friih- 
schriften (Leipzig), vol. 1, pp. 300-301 ("Nationalokonomic und Philosophic"). 6 

[Xla,2] 

"The nature which develops in human history — the genesis of human society — is 
man's real nature; hence, nature as it develops through industry, even though in 
an estranged form, is true anthropological nature." Karl Marx, Der historische 
Materialismus: Die Friihschriften, eel. Landshut and Mayer (Leipzig), vol. 1, 
p. 304 ("Nationalokonomie und Philosophic"). 7 [Xla,3] 



Point of departure for a critique of "culture": "The positive transcendence of 
private property, as the appropriation of human life, is . . . the positive transcen- 
dence of all estrangement; that is to say, the return of man from religion, family, 
state, and so on, to his human — that is, social — existence." Karl Marx, Der his- 
torische Materialismus, ed. Mayer and Landshut (Leipzig), vol. 1, p. 296 ("Na- 
tionalokonomie und Philosophie")." [Xla,4] 

A derivation of class hatred that draws on Hegel: "The annulling of objectivity in 
the form of estrangement (which has to advance from indifferent foreignness to 
real, antagonistic estrangement) means equally or even primarily, for Hegel, that 
it is ohjectivity which is to be annulled, because it is not the determinate character 
of the ohject but rather its ohjective character that is offensive and constitutes 
estrangement for self -consciousness." Karl Marx, Der historische Materialismus 
(Leipzig), vol. 1, p. 335 ("Nationalokonomie und Philosophie"). [Xla,5] 

Communism "in its first form." "Communism is . . ., in its first form, only a gener- 
alization and consummation of this relationship [that is, of private property] .... 
For it, the sole purpose of life and existence is direct, physical possession. The task 
of the laborer is not done away with, but extended to all men. It wants to do away 
by force with talent, and so forth. ... It may be said that this idea of the commu- 
nity of women gives away the secret of this as yet completely crude and thoughtless 
communism. Just as woman passes from marriage to general prostitution, so the 
entire world of wealth . . . passes from the relationship of exclusive marriage with 
the owner of private property to a state of universal prostitution with the commu- 
nity. . . . How little this annulment of private property is really an appropriation is 
. . . proved by the abstract negation of the entire world of culture and civilization, 
the regression to the unnatural simplicity of thepoor and undemanding man, who 
has not only failed to go beyond private property, but has not yet even reached it." 
Karl Marx, Der historische Materialismus, ed. Landshut and Mayer (Leipzig), 
vol. 1, pp. 292-293 ("Nationalokonomie und Philosophie"). 1 " [X2,l] 

It would be an error to deduce the psychology of the bourgeoisie from the 
attitude of the consumer. It is only the class of snobs that represents the stand- 
point of the consumer. The foundations for a psychology of the bourgeois class 
are much sooner to be found in the following sentence from Marx, which makes 
it possible, in particular, to describe the influence which this class exerts, as model 
and as customer, on art: "A certain stage of capitalist production dictates that the 
capitalist be able to devote the whole of the time during which he functions as a 
capitalist — that is, as personified capital — to the appropriation and therefore con- 
trol of the labor of others, and to the selling of the products of this labor." Karl 
Marx, Das Kapital, <vol. 1,> ed. Korsch (Berlin <1932>), p. 298. n [X2,2] 

From Marx, Kapital, vol. 3, part 1 (Hamburg, 1921), p. 84: "The advice of the 
hanker . . . more valuable than that of the priest. " Cited in Hugo Fischer, Karl 
Marx und sein Verhaltnis zu Staat und Wirtschaft (Jena, 1932), p. 56. 12 [X2,3] 



Time in technology: "As in a genuine political action, the choice ... of the right 
moment is crucial. 'That a capitalist should command on the field of production is 
now as indispensable as that a general should command on the field of battle' (vol. 
1, p. 278). 11 . . . 'Time' has here, in technology, a meaning different from the one it 
has in the historical events of the era, where . . . the 'actions all unfold on the same 
plane.' 'Time' in technology . . . also has a meaning different from the one it has in 
modern economics, which . . . measures labor-time in terms of the clock." Hugo 
Fischer, Karl Marx unci sein Verhaltnis zu Staat unci Wirtschaft (Jena, 1932), 
p. 42; citation from Kapital <vol. 1 > (Berlin, 1923). [X2,4] 

"If you recall that Coin-not died in 1877, and that his principal works were con- 
ceived during the Second Empire, you will recognize that, after Marx, he was one 
of the most lucid minds of his day. . . . Cournot goes well heyond Comte, who is 
misled by the dogma of his Religion of Humanity; beyond Taine, who is misled by 
the dogma of Science; and well beyond the nuanced skepticism of Renan. . . . He 
utters this admirahle sentence: 'From heing the king of creation, man has fallen — 
•r risen (depending on how one understands it) — to the role of concessionaire for 
a planet.' The mechanized civilization of the future in no way represents for him 
'the triumph of mind over matter' . . .; rather, it represents the triumph of the 
rational and general principles of things over the energy and qualities proper to 
the living organism." Georges Friedmann, La Crise du progres (Paris <1936>), 
p. 246. [X2a,l] 

"The dead matter was an advance over living lahor power; second, it is consumed 
in the latter's hlaze; and third, it once again takes its place on the throne. . . . For 
even hefore the entrance of the worker 'into the process of production, his own 
lahor is estranged from him, appropriated by the capitalist, and incorporated into 
capital; and during the process, it is continually materialized as an alien product.' 
. . . The deadly thing that assails technology from all directions is economics. 
Economics has, for its ohject, the commodity. 'The process of production' that 
hegins in a hlaze, as lahor engages its products, 'is extinguished in the commodity. 
The fact that labor power was expended in its fabrication now appears as a mate- 
rial property of the commodity, as the property of possessing value' (vol. 2, 
p. 361). . . . The action of a man, as the unique and 'entire connected act of pro- 
duction' (vol. 2, p. 201), is already more than the agent of this action. . . . The 
action already takes place in a higher sphere, which has the future for itself, the 
sphere of technics, while the agent of this action, as isolated individual, remains in 
the sphere of economics, and his product is likewise hound to tliis sphere. . . . 
Across the European continent, technology as a whole forms a single simultaneous 
action, insofar as it takes effect as technology; the physiognomy of the earth is 
from the outset transformed within the sphere of technics, and the gulf hetween 
city and country is ultimately spanned. But if the deadly force of economics should 
gain the upper hand, then the repetition of homologous magnitudes through abso- 
lutely interchangeable existences, the production of commodities through the 
agency of the worker, prevails over the singularity of the technological action." 



Hugo Fischer, Karl Marx unci sein Verhiiltnis zu Staat unci Wirtschaft (Jena, 
1932), pp. 43-45; the citations are from Kapital <vol. 2> (Hamburg, 1921). 14 

[X2a,2] 

"'The same spirit that constructs philosophic systems in the hrain of philosophers 
huilds railroads with the hands of workers.' ... In the desert of the nineteenth 
century, according to Marx, technology is the only sphere of life in which the 
human being moves at the center of a thing." Hugo Fischer, Karl Marx unci sein 
Verhiiltnis zu Staat unci Wirtschaft (Jena, 1932), pp. 39--40; the citation of Marx is 
apparently from Marx and Engels, Gesammelte Schriften, 1841-1850 (Stuttgart, 
1902), vol. l,p. 259. 15 [X3,l] 

On the divine forebears of the charlatan: "The various divine ancestors had by 
now [at the end of the eighteenth century] revealed not only prescriptions for 
elixirs of life hut also methods of dyeing, indications for spinning silk, and secrets 
of firing clay. The industry was mythologized." Grete de Francesco, Die Macht cles 
Charlatans (Basel <1937>), p. 154. [X3,2] 

Marx emphasizes "the decisive importance of the transformation of value and 
price of lahor power into the form of wages, or into the value and price of labor 
itself. This phenomenal form, which makes the actual relation invisible, and, 
indeed, shows the direct opposite of that relation, forms the basis of all the juridi- 
cal notions of both laborer and capitalist, of all the mystilications of the capitalis- 
tic mode of production, of all its illusions as to liberty." Karl Marx, Das Kapital 
<vol. 1>, ed. Korsch (Berlin <1932>), p. 499. 1( ' [X3,3] 

"Had we gone further, and inquired under what circumstanees all or even the 
majority of products take the form of commodities, we should have found that this 
can happen only with production of a very specific kind: capitalist production." 
Karl Marx, Das Kapital <vol. 1>, ed. Korseh, p. 171. 17 [X3,4] 

"This race of peculiar commodity-owners," as Marx at one point calls the prole- 
tariat (Kapital <vol. 1 > , ed. Korsch, p. 173). Compare: "Natural instinct of the 
commodity-owners" (ihid., p. 97).'" [X3,5] 

Marx opposes the idea that gold and silver are only imaginary values. "The fact 
that money can, in certain functions, be replaced by mere symbols of itself gave 
rise to that other mistaken notion: that it is itself a mere symbol. Nevertheless, 
under this error lurked a presentiment that the money-form of an object is not an 
inseparable part of that object hut is simply the form under which certain social 
relations manifest themselves. In this sense, every commodity is a symhol, since, 
insofar as it is value, it is only the material envelope of the human labor spent upon 
it. But if it he declared that . . . the material forms assumed hy the social qualities 
of lahor under the regime of a definite mode of production are mere symbols, it is 
in the same breath also declared that these characteristics are arhitrary fictions 



sanctioned by the so-called universal consent of mankind." Note after "spent upon 
it": '"If we consider the concept of value, we must look on the thing itself as only a 
symbol; it counts not as itself but as what it is worth' (Hegel, Rechtsphilosophie, 
addition to paragraph 63)." Marx, Das Kapital <vol. 1 > , ed. Korsch, pp. 101-102 
("Der AustauschprozeB"). 19 [X3,6] 

Private property as origin of the alienation of human beings from one another: 
"Objects in themselves are external to man, and consequently alienable by him. In 
order that this alienation may be reciprocal, it is only necessary for men, by a tacit 
understanding, to treat one another as private owners of those alienable objects, 
and by implication as independent individuals. But such a state of reciprocal 
independence has no existence in a primitive society based on property in com- 
mon. . . . The exchange of commodities, therefore, first begins on the boundaries 
of such communities." Karl Marx, Das Kapital <vol. 1>, eel. Korsch (Berlin, 
1932), p. 99 ("Der AustauschprozeB"). 20 [X3a,l] 

"In order that . . . objects may enter into relation with one another as commodi- 
ties, their guardians must place themselves in relation to one another, as persons 
whose will resides in those objects." Marx, Das Kapital <vol. 1>, ed. Korsch 
(Berlin, 1932), p. 95 ("Der AustauschprozeB"). 21 [X3a,2] 

Marx recognizes a climax in the development, and in the transparency, of the 
fetish character of the commodity: "The mode of production in which the product 
takes the form of a commodity, or is produced directly for exchange, is the most 
general and most embryonic form of bourgeois production. It therefore makes its 
appearance at an early date in history, though not in the same predominating and 
characteristic manner as nowadays. Hence, its fetish character is relatively easily 
seen through. But when we come to more concrete forms, even this appearance of 
simplicity vanishes." Marx, Das Kapital <vol. 1 > , ed. Korsch (Berlin, 1932), p. 94 
("Fetischcharakter"). 22 [X3a,3] 

The model according to which the polytechnical education demanded by Marx- 
ism must orient itself: "There are . . . states of society in which one and the same 
man does tailoring and weaving alternately, in which case these two forms of 
labor are mere modifications of the labor of the same individual, and not special 
and fixed functions of different persons" (Marx, Kapital, p. 57). These various 
modified acts of labor on the part of one individual are not compared with one 
another quantitatively, in terms of duration; to the abstraction "mere labor," 
which we can educe from them, corresponds nothing real; they stand within a 
unique concrete labor-context, the results of which bring no advantage to the 
owner of commodities. Compare the following: "For a society based upon the 
production of commodities, in which the producers in general enter into social 
relations with one another by treating their products as commodities . . . , 
whereby they reduce their individual private labor to the standard of homogene- 
ous human labor — for such a society, Christianity with its cult us of abstract man 



. . . is the most fitting form of religion." Marx, Kapital, p. 91 ("Fetischcharak- 
ter"). 23 [X3a,4] 



"Tlie body of the commodity, which serves as the equivalent, figures as the 
materialization of human labor in the abstract, and is at the same time the 
product of some specifically useful concrete labor. This concrete labor becomes, 
therefore, the medium for expressing abstract human labor." In this latter is 
contained, as Marx believes, all the misery of the commodity-producing society. 
(The passage is from Kapital, p. 70 ["Die Wertform oder der Tauschwert"].) 24 In 
addition, it is very important that Marx immediately after this (p. 71) refers to 
abstract human labor as the "opposite" of the concrete. — To formulate differ- 
ently the misery at issue here, one could also say: it is the misery of the commod- 
ity-producing society that, for it, "labor directly social in character" (p. 71) is 
always merely abstract labor. If Marx, in his treatment of the equivalent form, 
lays weight on the fact "that the labor of private individuals takes the form of its 
opposite, labor directly social in form" (p. 71), then this private labor is precisely 
the abstract labor of the abstract commodity-owning man. [X4,l] 

Marx has the idea that labor would be accomplished voluntarily (as travail 
passionne) if the commodity character of its production were abolished. The 
reason, according to Marx, that labor is not accomplished voluntarily would 
therefore be: its abstract character. [X4,2] 

"Value . . . converts every product into a social hieroglyphic. Later on, men try to 
decipher the hieroglyphic, to get behind the secret of their own social products; for 
the definition of the object of utility as value is just as much their social product as 
language." Marx, Das Kapital <vol. 1>, p. 86 ("Der Fetischcharakter der Ware 
und sein Geheimnis"). 25 [X4,3] 

"The general value-form, which represents all products of labor as mere congela- 
tions of undifferentiated human labor, shows by its very structure that it is the 
social expression of the commodity world. Thus, it reveals that within this world 
the generally human [that is, the impoverished and abstract] character of the 
labor constitutes at the same time its distinguishing feature as social labor." Marx, 
Das Kapital <vol. 1>, p. 79 ("Die Wertform oder der Tauschwert"). 26 — The ab- 
stract nature of the social labor and the abstract nature of the human being who 
relates to fellow humans as an owner correspond to each other. [X4,4] 

"How are we to express the fact that weaving creates the value of the linen not by 
virtue of being weaving, as such, but by reason of its general property of being 
human labor? Simply by opposing to weaving that other particular form of con- 
crete labor (in this instance tailoring), which produces the equivalent of the prod- 
uct of weaving. Just as the coat in its bodily form became a direct expression of 
value, so now does tailoring, a concrete form of labor, appear as the direct and 
palpable embodiment of human labor generally" (Kapital <vol. 1>, p. 71). 27 This 



is what Marx is referring to when he writes in the sentence preceding this passage: 
"In the value-expression of the commodity, the tables are turned." At this point a 
note: "This inversion, whereby the sensuous-concrete counts only as a phenome- 
nal form of the abstract-general — rather than the abstract-general as a property 
of the concrete — is characteristic of the expression of value. ... If I say: Roman 
law and German law are both systems of law, my statement is perfectly self-evi- 
dent. But if I say: the law, that abstract concept, realizes itself in Roman law and 
in Germanlaw, those concrete legal systems, my context becomes mystical" (p. 71) 
("Die Wertform oder der Tauschwert"). [X4a,l] 

"When I state that coats or boots stand in a relation to linen because linen is the 
universal incarnation of abstract human labor, the absurdity of the proposition is 
manifest. Nevertheless, when the producers of coats and boots compare those 
articles with linen, or, what is the same thing, with gold or silver, as the universal 
equivalent, they express the relation between their own private labor and the 
collective labor of society in precisely this absurd form." Karl Marx, Das Kapital, 
<vol. 1 > , ed. Korsch (Berlin, 1932), p. 88 ("Fetischcharakter"). 2l! [X4a,2] 

"Political economy has . . . never . . . asked the question why labor is represented 
by the value of its product, and labor-time by the magnitude of that value. These 
formulas, which bear it stamped upon them in unmistakable letters that they 
belong to a state of society in which the process of production has the mastery over 
man, instead of being controlled by him — such formulas appear to the bourgeois 
intellect to be as much a self-evident necessity imposed by nature as productive 
labor itself." Marx, Das Kapital <vol. 1>, ed. Korsch, p. 92-93 ("Der 
Fetischcharakter der Ware mid sein Geheimnis"). 29 [X4a,3] 

An extremely important passage relating to the concept of the "creative" is 
Marx's comment on the beginning of the first paragraph of the Gotha Program, 
"Labor is the source of all wealth and all culture": "The bourgeois have very 
good grounds for falsely ascribing supernatural creative power to labor, since pre- 
cisely from the fact that labor depends on nature, it follows that the man who 
possesses no other property than his labor power must, in all conditions of 
society and culture, be the slave of other men who have made themselves owners 
of the material conditions of labor." Karl Marx, Randglossen mm Programm der 
deutschen Arbeiterpartei, ed. Korsch (Berlin and Leipzig, 1922), p. 22. 3 ° [X5,l] 

"Within the cooperative society based on common ownership of the means of 
production, the producers do not exchange their products; just as little does the 
labor employed on the products appear here at the value of these products, as a 
material quality possessed by them, since now, in contrast to capitalist society, 
individual labor exists no longer in an indirect fashion, but directly as a compo- 
nent part of the total labor. The phrase 'proceeds of labor' . . . thus loses all 
meaning." The passage refers to the demand for "a fair distribution of the pro- 



ceeds of labor." Marx, Raiidglossen zum Programm der deutschen Arbeiter partei 
(Berlin and Leipzig, 1922), pp. 25, 24. :il [X5,2] 



"In a higher phase of communist society, after the enslaving subordination of the 
individual to the division of labor, and therewith also the antithesis between men- 
tal and physical labor, has vanished; after labor has become not only a means of 
life but life's chief necessity; after the productive forces have also increased with 
the all-round development of the individual . . . — only then can the narrow hori- 
zon of bourgeois right be crossed in its entirety and society inscribe on its banners: 
'From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs!'" Marx, 
Raiidglossen zum Programm der deutschen Arbeiter partei (Berlin and Leipzig, 
1922), p. 27. 32 [X5,3] 

Marx in his critique of the Gotha Program of 1875: "Lassalle knew the Communist 
Manifesto by heart. ... If, therefore, he has falsified it so grossly, he has done so 
only to put a good face on his alliance with absolutist and feudal opponents against 
the bourgeoisie." Marx, Raiidglossen zum Programm der deutschen Arbeiter- 
partei, <ed. Korsch,> p. 28.'^ [X5,4] 

Korsch directs attention to a "scientific insight that is fundamental to the overall 
understanding of Marxist communism, though today it is often looked upon by the 
adversaries of Marxism, and even by many of its proponents, as 'meaningless' — 
the insight, namely, that iheivages of labor are not, as bourgeois economists like to 
think, the value (or price) of the labor, but 'only a masked form of the value (or 
price) of the labor power, which is sold as a commodity on the labor market well 
before its productive utility (as labor) begins in the operation of the capitalist 
proprietor." Karl Korsch, Introduction to Marx, Raiidglossen zum Programm 
der deutschen Arbeiter partei, ed. Korsch (Berlin and Leipzig, 1922), p. 17. 

[X5a,l] 

Schiller: "Common natures pay with what they do; noble natures, with what 
they are." :w The proletarian pays for what he is with what he does. [X5a,2] 

"In the course of the labor process, labor passes continually out of a state of unrest 
into a state of being, out of the form of motion into the form of objectivity. At the 
end of one hour's spinning, that act is represented by a definite quantity of yarn; 
in other words, a definite quantity of labor, namely that of one hour, has been 
objectified in the cotton. We say 'labor' because the work of spinning counts here 
only insofar as it is the expenditure of labor power in general, and not insofar as it 
is the specific work of the spinner. . . . Raw material and product appear here [in 
the production of surplus value] in quite a new light, very different from that in 
which we viewed them in the labor process pure and simple. The raw material 
serves now merely as an absorbent of a definite quantity of labor. . . . Definite 
quantities of product, these quantities being determined by experience, now rep- 
resent nothing but definite quantities of labor, definite masses of crystallized labor 



time. They are notlungmore than the materialization of so many hours or so many 
clays of social labor." Karl Marx, Das Kapital <vol. 1>, ed. Korsch (Berlin 
<1932>), p. 191 ("WertbildungsprozeB"). 35 [X5a,3] 



The petty-bourgeois-idealist theory of labor is given an unsurpassed formulation 
in Sinunel, for whom it figures as the theory of labor per se. And with this, the 
moralistic element — here in antimaterialist form — is registered very clearly. 
"One may . . . assert in very general terms that . . . the distinction between mental 
and manual labor is not one between mental and material nature; that, rather, the 
reward is ultimately required in the latter case only for the internal aspect of 
work, for the aversion to exertion, for the conscription of will power. Of course, 
this intellectuality, which is, as it were, the thing-in-itself behind the appearance of 
work . . . , is not really intellectual but resides in emotion and the will. It follows 
from this that it is not coordinated with mental labor but rather is its basis. For at 
first the objective content . . . , the result . . . , the demand for reward is produced 
not in it but in . . . the expenditure of energy that it requires for the production of 
this intellectual content. In that an act of the soul is revealed to be the source of 
value . . . , physical and 'mental' labor contain a common (one might say, mor- 
ally) value-grounding base, through which the reduction of labor value as such to 
physical labor loses its philistine and brutal materialistic appearance. This is 
roughly the case with theoretical materialism, which acquires a completely new 
and more seriously discussible basis if one emphasizes that matter itself is also a 
conception, not an essence which, ... in the absolute sense, stands opposed to the 
soul but which in its cognizability is completely determined by the forms and 
presuppositions of our intellectual organization." Of course, with these reflec- 
tions (<Philosophie des Geldes (Leipzig, 1900), > pp. 449-450), Sinunel is playing 
devil's advocate, for he does not want to admit the reduction of labor to physical 
labor. Indeed there is also, according to him, a valueless labor that still requires 
an expenditure of energy. "This means, however, that the value of labor is 
measured not by its amount but by the utility of its result!" Sinunel goes on to 
reproach Marx, as it appears, for confusing a statement of fact with a demand. 
He writes: "socialism, in fact, strives for a . . . society in which the utility value of 
objects, in relation to the labor time applied to them, forms a constant" (<ibid.,> 
p. 451). "In the third volume of Capital, Marx argues that the precondition of all 
value, of the labor theory too, is use value. Yet this means that so many parts of 
the total social labor time are used in each product as come in relation to its 
importance in use. . . . The approximation to this completely Utopian state of 
affairs seems to be technically possible only if, as a whole, nothing but the . . . 
unquestionably basic life necessities are produced. For where this is exclusively 
the case, one work activity is of course precisely as necessary and useful as the 
next. In contrast, however, as long as one moves into the higher spheres in which, 
on the one hand, need and estimation of utility are inevitably more individual 
and, on the other, the intensity of labor is more difficult to prove, no regulation of 
the amounts of production could bring about a situation in which the relation- 
ship between need and labor applied was everywhere the same. On these points, 



all the threads of the deliberations on socialism intertwine. At this point, it is clear 
that the . . . difficulty . . . increases in relation to the cultural level of the prod- 
uct — a difficulty whose avoidance, of course, must limit production to that of the 
most primitive, most essential, and most average objects." Georg Simmel, Philoso- 
phic des Geldes (Leipzig, 1900), pp. 451-453. 36 With this critique, compare the 
counter-critique of this standpoint by Korsch, X9,l. [X6;X6a] 

"The individual signilicance of different objects of equal value is degraded 
through their exchangeability — however indirectly or imaginary this may be. . . . 
The disparagement of the interest in the individuality of a commodity leads to a 
disparagement of individuality itself. If the two sides to a commodity arc its quality 
and its price, then it seems logically impossible for the interest to be focused on 
only one of these sides; for 'cheapness' is an empty word if it does not imply a low 
price for a relatively good quality. . . . Yet this conceptual impossibility is psycho- 
logically real and effective. The interest in the one side can be so great that its 
logically necessary counterpart completely disappears. The typical instance of one 
of these cases is the 'fifty-cent bazaar.' The principle of valuation in the modern 
money economy fi nds its clearest expression here. It is not the commodity that is 
the center of interest here but the price — a principle that in former times not only 
would have appeared shameless but would have been absolutely impossible. It has 
heen rightly pointed out that the medieval town . . . lacked the extensive capital 
economy, and that tbis was the reason for seeking the ideal of the economy, not so 
much in the expansion (which is possihle only through cheapness) as in the quality 
of the goods offered." Georg Simmel, Philosophic des Geldes (Leipzig, 19M), 



"Political economy is now no longer a science of commodities. ... It becomes a 
direct science of social labor": "in its present unambiguous, and definite, form of 
labor producing a commodity for another person — that is, of lahor formally paid 
to its full value but actually exploited . . . , actually collective labor performed hy 
proletarian wage laborers ... to whom . . . the productive power of what would he 
under otherwise similar conditions the produce of an isolated worker, now in- 
creased a thousandfold hy the social division of labor, stands opposed in the form 
of capital." <Karl> Korsch <Karl Marx, manuscript), vol. 2, p. 47. :,s Compare 



On the bungled reception of technology. "The illusions in this sphere are 
reflected quite clearly in the terminology that is used in it, and in which a mode of 
thinking, proud of its . . . freedom from myth, discloses the direct opposite of 
these features. To think that we conquer or control nature is a very childish 
supposition, since ... all notions of . . . conquest and subjugation have a proper 
meaning only if an opposing will has been broken. . . . Natural events, as such, 
are not subject to the alternatives of freedom and coercion. . . . Although . . . this 
seems to be just a matter of terminology, it does lead astray those who think 
superficially in the direction of anthropomorphic misinterpretations, and it does 



pp. 411-112." 



[X7,l] 



Xll,l. 



[X7,2] 



show that the mythological mode of thought is also at home within the natural- 
scientific worldview." Georg Simmel, Philosophic des Geldes (Leipzig, 1900), 
pp. 520-521. 39 It is the great distinction of Fourier that he wanted to open the 
way to a very different reception of technology. [X7a,l] 

"The . . . doctrine of 'surplus value,'' already largely anticipated ... by the classic 
hourgeois economists and their earliest socialist adversaries, . . . and the reduc- 
tion of the 'free labor contract' of the modern wage laborer to the sale of the 
'commodity labor-power,' first acquire their real efficacy through the transfer of 
economic thought from the field of the exchange of commodities ... to the field of 
material production . . . — that is, through the transition from . . . surplus value, 
existing in the form of goods and money, to . . . surplus labor, performed by real 
workers in the workshop under the social domination exerted upon them by the 
capitalist owner of the workshop." Korsch <Karl Marx, manuscript), vol. 2, 
pp. 41-42." [X7a,2] 

Korsch, vol. 2, p. 47, cites a phrase from Marx <Das Kapital, vol. 1, 4th ed. 
(Hamburg, 1890), pp. 138-139>". "the hidden haunts of production, on whose 
threshold we are faced with the inscription: 'No admittance except on busi- 
ness."" 1 Compare Dante's inscription on the Gate of Hell, and the "one-way 
street." [X7a,3] 

Korsch defines surplus value as the "particularly 'deranged' form which the gen- 
eral fetishism attached to all commodities assumes in the commodity called 'lahor- 
power.'" Karl Korsch, Karl Marx, manuscript, vol. 2, p. 53. 12 [X8,l] 

"What Marx . . . terms the 'fetishism of the world of commodities' is only a scien- 
tific expression for the same thing that he had described earlier ... as 'human 
self -alienation.' . . . The most important substantive difference between this philo- 
sophical critique of economic 'self -alienation' and the later scientific exposition of 
the same problem consists in the fact that, in Das Kapital, Marx . . . gave his 
economic critique a deeper and more general significance by tracing back the 
delusive character of all other economic categories to the fetish character of the 
commodity. Though even now that most obvious and direct form of the 'self -al- 
ienation of the human being,' which occurs in the relation hetween wage labor and 
capital, keeps its decisive importance for the practical attack on the existing order 
of society, the fetishism of commodity labor power is, at this stage, for theoretical 
purposes regarded as a mere derivative form of the more general fetishism which is 
contained in the commodity itself. ... By revealing all economic categories to be 
mere fragments of one great fetish, Marx ultimately transcended all preceding 
forms and phases of bourgeois economic and social theory. . . . Even the most 
advanced classical economists remained caught in the . . . world of bourgeois ap- 
pearance, or fell back into it, because they had never succeeded in extending their 
critical analysis either to the derived forms of economic fetishism [unmasking of 
the gold and silver fetishes, the physiocratic illusion that rent grows out of the 



earth, the interpretation of interest and rent as mere fractions of industrial profit] 
or to that general fundamental form which appears in the value-form of the labor 
products as commodity and in the value-relations of the commodities themselves." 
Korsch, Karl Marx, <vol. 2,> pp. 53-57. " [X8,2] 

"From the bourgeois point of view, the individual citizen thinks of 'economic' 
things and forces as of something entering into his private life from without. . . . 
According to the new conception, however, individuals in all they do are moving, 
from the outset, within definite social circumstances that arise from a given stage 
in the development of material production. . . . Such high ideals of bourgeois 
society as that of the free, self -determining individual, freedom and equality of all 
citizens in the exercise of their poJitical rights, and equality of all in the eyes of the 
law are now seen to be nothing but correlative concepts to the fetishism of the 
commodity. . . . Only by keeping the people unconscious of the real contents of 
those basic relations of the existing social order . . . , only through the f etishistic 
transformation of the social relations between the class of capitalists and the class 
of wage laborers, resulting in the 'free and unhampered' sale of the 'commodity 
labor-power' to the owner of 'capital,' is it possible in this society to speak of 
freedom and equality." Korsch, Karl Marx, <vol. 2,> pp. 75-77 ,' M [X8a,l] 

"The individual and collective bargaining over the conditions of sale of the com- 
modity labor-power still belongs entirely to the world of fetishistic appearance 
<Schein>. Socially considered, and together with the material means of produc- 
tion, the propertyless wage laborers selling, through a 'free labor contract,' their 
individual labor-powers for a certain time to a capitalist entrepreneur are, as a 
class, from the outset and forever, a common property of the possessing class, 
which alone has the real means of labor at its disposal. It was therefore not the 
whole truth that was revealed by Marx in the Communist Manifesto when he said 
that the bourgeoisie had . . . replaced the veiled forms of exploitation practiced 
during the . . . Middle Ages by an altogether 'unveiled exploitation.' The bourgeoi- 
sie replaced an exploitation embroidered with religious and political illusions by a 
new and more refined system of concealed exploitation. Whereas in earlier epochs 
the openly proclaimed relations of domination and servitude appeared as the 
immediate springs of production, in the bourgeois period it is ... , conversely, 
production that is . . . the pretext . . . for the . . . exploitation of laborers." 
<Korsch,> Karl Marx, <vol. 2,> pp. 64-65. * 5 [X8a,2] 

On the doctrine of value: "The idea that there is an 'equality' inherent in all kinds 
of labor, by which economists are entitled to regard qualitatively different kinds 
of labor ... as quantitatively different portions of a total quantity of 'general 
labor,' which forms the basis of the economic concept of value, is so little the 
discovery of a natural condition underlying the production and exchange of 
commodities that this 'equality' is, on the contrary, brought into existence by the 
social fact that, under the conditions prevailing in present-day capitalist 'com- 
modity production,' all labor products are produced as commodities for such 



exchange. In fact, this 'equality' appears nowhere else than in the 'value' of the 
commodities so produced. The full development of the economic theory of 'labor 
value' coincided with a stage of the historical development when human labor, 
not just as a category but in reality, had long ceased to be, as it were, organically 
connected with either the individual or with small productive communities and, 
the barriers of the guilds having fallen under the new bourgeois banner of 'free- 
dom of trade,' every particular kind of labor was treated henceforth as equivalent 
to every other particular kind of labor. It was precisely the advent of these 
historical and political conditions that was expressed (unconsciously, of course) 
by the classical economists when they traced back the 'value' appearing in the 
exchange of commodities to the quantities of labor incorporated therein, though 
most of them believed they had thus disclosed a natural law. . . . Those minor 
followers in the wake of the great scientific founders of political economy, no 
longer accustomed to such audacity of scientific thought, who have later patheti- 
cally bewailed the 'violent abstraction' by which the classical economists and 
Marxism, in tracing the value relations of commodities to the amounts of labor 
incorporated therein, have 'equaled the unequal,' must be reminded of the fact 
that this 'violent abstraction' results not from . . . economic science but from the 
real character of capitalist commodity production. The commodity is a born leveler." 
Korsch, Karl Marx, vol. 2, pp. 66-68. In "reality," of course, the "particular kinds 
of labor performed in the production of the various useful things are, according 
to Marx, effectively different also under the regime of the law of value" (ibid., 
p. 68). 40 This in opposition to Simmel; compare X6a. [X9] 

"Marx and Engels . . . pointed out that the equality-idea resulting from the epoch 
of bourgeois commodity-production and expressed in the economic 'law of value' 
is still bourgeois in its character. It is therefore only ideologically incompatible 
with the exploitation of the working class through capital, but not in actual prac- 
tice. The socialist Ricardians, ... on the basis of the economic principle that 'it is 
labor alone which bestows value,' . . . wanted to transform all men into actual 
workers exchanging equal quantities of labor. . . . Marx replied that 'this equali- 
tarian relation ... is itself nothing but the reflection of the actual world; and that 
therefore it is totally impossible to reconstitute society on the basis of what is 
merely an embellished shadow of it. In proportion as this shadow takes on sub- 
stance again, we perceive that this substance, far from being the transfiguration 
dreamt of, is the actual body of existing society."' The citation from La Misere de 
la philosophic, in Korsch, vol. 2, p. 4. 47 [X9a,l] 

Korsch: In the bourgeois epoch, "the production of the products of labor is pretext 
and cover for the . . . exploitation and oppression of the laborers. The scientific 
method of concealing this state of affairs is called political economy." Its function: 
to shift "responsibility for all the waste and hideousness which is already found at 
the present stage of development of the productive forces of society, and which 
emerges catastrophically during economic crises, from the realm of human action 



to the sphere of so-called immutable, nature-ordained relations between things." 
Korsch, Karl Marx, vol. 2, p. 65. "' [X9a,2] 



"The distinction between use value and exchange value, in the abstract form in 
which it had been made by the bourgeois economists, . . . did not provide any 
useful starting point for an . . . investigation of bourgeois commodity produc- 
tion. . . . With Marx, . . . use value is not defined as a use value in general, but as 
the use value of a commodity. This use value inherent in commodities ... is, 
however, not merely an extra-economic presupposition of their 'value.' It is an 
element of the value. . . . The mere fact that a thing has utility for any human 
being — say, for its producer — does not yet give us the economic definition of use 
value. Not until the thing has . . . utility 'for other persons' . . . does the economic 
definition of use value apply. Just as the use value of the commodity is economi- 
cally defined as a social use value (use value 'for others'), so is the . . . labor which 
goes into the production of this commodity defined economically as . . . labor 'for 
others.' Thus, Marx's commodity- producing labor appears as social labor in a 
twofold sense. It has . . . the general social character of being a 'specifically useful 
labor,' which goes to the production of a definite kind of social use value. It has, on 
the other hand, the specific historical character of being a 'generally social labor,' 
which goes to the production of a definite quantity of exchange value. The capacity 
of social labor to produce definite things useful to human beings . . . appears in the 
use value of its product. Its capacity for the production of a value and a surplus 
value for the capitalist (a particular characteristic of labor which derives from the 
particular form of the social organization of the labor process . . . within the 
present historical epoch) appears in the exchange value of its product. The fusion 
of the two social characteristics of commodity-producing labor appears in the 
'value-form' of the product of labor, or the form of commodity. " Korsch, Karl 
Marx <vol. 2 > , pp. 42-44.** [X10] 

"The earlier bourgeois economists, when speaking of labor as a source of wealth, 
had likewise thought of 'labor' in terms of the various forms of real work, though 
they did so only for the reason that their economic categories were still in the 
process of separation from their original material contents. . . . Thus, the Mercan- 
tilists, the Physiocrats, and so on successfully declared that the true source of 
wealth lies in the labor expended in the export industries, in trade and shipping, in 
agricultural labor, and the like. Even in Adam Smith — who, from the different 
branches of labor, definitely advanced to the general form of commodity-produc- 
ing labor — we find that concrete aspect retained, along with the new and more 
formalistic definition which is also expressed in bis system and was later to become 
the exclusive definition of value in the work of Ricardo, and by which labor is 
defined as an abstract and merely quantitative entity. This same abstract form of 
labor, which he correctly defined as exchange-value-producing labor, he at the 
same time . . . declared to be the only source ... of the material wealth of the 
community, or use value. This doctrine, which still obstinately persists in 'vulgar' 
socialism ... is, according to Marx, economically false." By its assumptions, "it 



would he difficult to explain why, in present day . . . society, just those persons are 
poor who hitherto have had that unique source of all wealth at their exclusive 
disposal, and even more difficult to account for the fact that they remain unem- 
ployed and poor, instead of producing wealth hy their labor. . . . But ... in prais- 
ing the creative power of 'labor,' Adam Smith was thinking not so much of the 
forced lahor of the modern wage laborer, wliich appears in the value of commodi- 
ties and produces capitalistic profit, as of the general natural necessity of human 
labor. . . . Likewise, his naive glorification of the 'division of labor' achieved in 
these 'great manufactures,' hy which he understood the whole of modern capital- 
ist production, refers not so much to the extremely imperfect form of contempo- 
rary capitalistic division of labor ... as to the general form of human labor 
vaguely fused with it in his theoretical exposition." Korsch, Karl Marx, vol. 2, 



•ecisive passage on surplus value, the final statement no doubt standing in need 
of further clarification: "Similarly, the doctrine of surplus value, which is usually 
regarded as the more particularly socialist section of Marx's economic theory, is 
neither a simple economic exercise in calculation which serves to check a fraudu- 
lent statement of value received and expended by capital in its dealing with the 
workers, nor a moral lesson drawn from economics for the purpose of reclaiming 
from capital the diverted portion of the 'full product of the worker's labor.' The 
Marxian doctrine, as an economic theory, starts rather from the opposite princi- 
ple — that the industrial capitalist under 'normal' conditions acquires the labor- 
power of the wage laborers by means of a respectable and businesslike bargain, 
whereby the laborer receives the full equivalent of the 'commodity' sold by him, 
that is, of the 'labor-power' incorporated in himself. The advantage gained by the 
capitalist in this business derives not from economics but from his privileged 
social position as the monopolist owner of the material means of production, 
which permits him to exploit, for the production of commodities in his work- 
shop, the specific use value of a labor-power which he has purchased at its eco- 
nomic 'value' (exchange value). Between the value of the new commodities produced 
by the use of the labor-power in the workshop, and the prices paid for this labor to its 
sellers, there is, according to Marx, no economic or other rationally determinable relation 
whatever. The measure of value produced by the workers in the shape of their 
labor products over and above the equivalent of their wages (that is, the mass of 
'surplus labor 1 expended by them in producing this 'surplus value') and the quan- 
titative relation between this surplus labor and the necessary labor (that is, the 
'rate of surplus value' 1 or the 'rate oj Sexploitation' holding good for a particular time 
and a particular country) do not result from any exact economic calculation. 
They result from a battle between social classes." Korsch, Karl Marx, vol. 2, 



pp. 44-46. 50 



[XlOa] 



pp. 71-72. 51 



[Xll] 



"The ultimate meaning of this law of value, as shown in its workings hy Marx, . . . 
does not consist ... in supplying a theoretical basis for the practical calculations 
of the businessman seeking his private advantage, or for the economic-political 



measures taken hy the hourgeois statesman concerned with the general mainte- 
nance and furtherance of the capitalist surplus-making machinery. The final 
scientific purpose of the Marxian theory is, rather, L to reveal the economic laiv of 
motion of modern society, and this means, at the same time, the law of its historical 
development. "' Korsch, Karl Marx, vol. 2, p. 70. 32 [Xlla,l] 

"Complete determination of the actual social character of that fundamental proc- 
ess of modern capitalist production which is one-sidedly presented by the hour- 
geois economists, as hy their adversaries from the camp of vulgar socialism, 
sometimes as production of consumer goods, and sometimes, hy contrast, as pro- 
duction of value or as simple profitmaking": a "production of surplus value by 
means of the production of value hy means of the production of consumer goods — 
in a society in which the material goods of production enter as capital into the 
process of production run by the capitalists, while the actual producers enter as 
the commodity labor-power." Korsch, Karl Marx, vol. 3, pp. 10-11. [Xlla,2] 

The experience of our generation: that capitalism will not die a natural death. 

[Xlla,3] 

The confrontation of Laf argue with Jaures is very characteristic for the great 
form of materialism. [ X 1 1 a,4] 



Sources for Marx and Engels: "From the bourgeois historians of the French Resto- 
ration, they took the concept of social class and of class struggle; from Ricardo, 
the economic basis of the class antagonism; from Proudhon, the proclamation of 
the modern proletariat as the only real revolutionary class; from the feudal and 
Christian assailants of the new economic order . . . , the ruthless unmasking of the 
liberal ideas of the bourgeoisie, the piercing hate-filled invective. Their ingenious 
dissection of the unsolvahle contradictions of the modern mode of production they 
took from the petty-bourgeois socialism of Sismondi; the humanism and the phi- 
losophy of action, from earlier companions among the left Hegelians, especially 
from Feuerbach; the meaning of political struggle for the working class, from the 
contemporary labor parties, French Social Democrats and English Chartists; the 
doctrine of revolutionary dictatorship, from the French Convention, and from 
Blanqui and his followers. Finally, they took from Saint-Simon, Fourier, and 
Owen the entire content of their socialist and communist agenda: the total up- 
heaval of the foundations of existing capitalist society, the aholition of classes . . . , 
and the transformation of the state into a mere administration of production." 
Korsch, Karl Marx, vol. 3, p. 101 . 53 [X12,l] 

"Through Hegel, the new materialism of proletarian theory linked itself to the sum 
of hourgeois social thought of the preceding historical period. It did so in the same 
antithetical form in which, on a practical level also, the social action of the prole- 
tariat continued the previous social movement of the bourgeois class." Korsch, 
Karl Marx, vol. 3, p. 99. M [X12,2] 



Korsch says very justly (and one might well tlfink of de Maistre and Bonald in 
this connection): "To a certain extent, that . . . 'disenchantment' which, alter the 
conclusion of the great French Revolution, was first proclaimed hy the early 
French theorists of the counterrevolution and by the German Romantics . . . has 
in fact exerted a considerable influence upon Marx mainly through Hegel, and 
has thus directly entered into the . . . theory of the modern workers' movement." 
Korsch, Karl Marx, vol. 2, p. 365' [X12,3] 

Concept of productive force: '"Productive force' is, in the first place, nothing else 
than the real earthly lahor-power of living men: the force ... by which . . . they 
produce . . . , under capitalistic conditions, 'commodities.' . . . Everything that 
increases the productive effect of human lahor-power ... is a new social 'produc- 
tive force.' To the material forces of production belong nature, technology, and 
science; hut to these forces helong, above all, the social organization itself and the 
. . . social forces created therein by cooperation and the industrial division of 
lahor." Korsch, Karl Marx, vol. 3, pp. 54-55. 56 [X12a,l] 

Concept of productive force: "The Marxian concept of 'social' productive forces 
has nothing in common with the idealistic abstractions of the old and new 'techno- 
crats,' who imagine they can define and measure the productive powers of society 
... in terms of natural science and technology. . . . 'Technocratic' prescriptions 
are not sufficient in themselves to remove the material ohstacles which oppose any 
important change in present-day capitalistic society. . . . There is more power of 
resistance in the mute force of economic conditions . . . than well-meaning techno- 
crats have ever dreamt of." Korsch, Karl Marx, vol. 3, pp. 59-60." [X12a,2] 

In Marx — "Das philosophische Manifest der historischen Rechtsschule," Rhein- 
ische Zeitung, 221 (1842) — there appears, as a point of inference, "the correct 
idea . . . that the primitive conditions are naive 'Dutch pictures' of the true condi- 
tions." Cited in Korsch, vol. I , p. 35. 5!l [X12a,3] 

Against Proudhon, who looks on maclfine and division of labor as antithetical to 
each other, Marx emphasizes how much the division of labor has been refined 
since the introduction of machinery. Hegel, for his part, emphasized that the 
division of labor, in a certain sense, opened the way for the introduction of 
machinery. "This parceling out of their content . . . gives rise to the division of 
labor. . . . The labor which thus becomes more abstract tends, on one hand, by its 
uniformity, to make labor easier and to increase production; on another, to limit 
each person to a single kind of technical skill, and thus produce more uncondi- 
tional dependence on the social system. The skill itself becomes in tliis way 
mechanical, and becomes capable of letting the machine take the place of hu- 
man labor." Hegel, Enzyklopadie der philosophuchen Wissenschqften im Grundrisse 
(Leipzig, 1920), p 436 (paragraphs 525-526) :* [X12a,4] 

The critique carried out hy the young Marx on the "rights of man," as separated 
from the "rights of the citizen." "None of the so-called rights of man goes heyond 



egoistic man. . . . Far from the rights of man conceiving of man as a species-being, 
species-life itself, society, appears as a framework exterior to individuals. . . . The 
only bond that holds them together is natural necessity, need and private interest, 
the conservation of their property and egoistic person. It is . . . paradoxical . . . 
that citizenship, the political community, is degraded by the political emancipa- 
tors to a mere means for the preservation of these so-called rights of man; that the 
citizen is declared to be the servant of egoistic man; that the sphere in which man 
behaves as a communal being is degraded below the sphere in which man behaves 
as a partial being; finally that it is not man as a citizen but man as a bourgeois who 
is called the real and true man. . . . The riddle has a simple solution. . . . What was 
the character of the old society? . . . Feudalism . The old civil society had a directly 
political character. . . . The political revolution . . . abolished the political charac- 
ter of civil society. It shattered civil society ... on the one hand into individuals, 
on the other hand into the material and spiritual elements that make up the . . . 
civil position of these individuals. . . . The formation of the political state and the 
dissolution of civil society into independent individuals, who are related by law 
just as the estate and corporation men were related by privilege, is completed in 
one and the same act. Man as member of civil society, unpolitical man, appears 
necessarily as natural man. The rights of man appear as natural rights, because 
self-conscious activity is concentrated upon political action. Egoistic man is the 
passive, given result of the dissolved society, ... a natural object. Political revolu- 
tion's . . . attitude to civil society, to the world of need, to work, private interests, 
and private law, is that they are ... its natural basis. Finally, man as a member of 
civil society counts for true man, for man as distinct from the citizen, because he is 
man in his sensuous . . . existence, while political man is only the abstract . . . 
man. . . . The abstraction of the political man is thus correctly described by Rous- 
seau: 'He who dares to undertake the making of a people's institutions ought to 
feel himself capable ... of changing human nature, of transforming each individ- 
ual, who is by himself a complete and solitary whole, into part of a greater whole 
from which he . . . receives his life and being' (Contrat social [London, 1782], vol. 
2, p. 67)." Marx, "Zur Judenfrage," in Marx and Engels, Gesamtausgabe, vol. 1, 
section 1 , 1 (Frankfurt am Main, 1927), pp. 595-599. 60 [X13] 

The property appertaining to the commodity as its fetish character attaches as 
well to the commodity-producing society — not as it is in itself, to be sure, but 
more as it represents itself and thinks to understand itself whenever it abstracts 
from the fact that it produces precisely commodities. The image that it produces 
of itself in this way, and that it customarily labels as its culture, corresponds to the 
concept of phantasmagoria (compare "Eduard Fuchs, Collector and Historian," 
section 3). fil The latter is denned by Wiesengrund "as a consumer item in which 
there is no longer anything that is supposed to remind us how it came into being. 
It becomes a magical object, insofar as the labor stored up in it comes to seem 
supernatural and sacred at the very moment when it can no longer be recognized 
as labor" (T. W. Adorno, "Fragmente fiber Wagner," £eitschrtft Jiir Sozialfor- 
schung, 8, nos. 1-2 [1939], p. 17). In connection with this, from the manuscript on 
Wagner (pp. 46-47) : "The art of Wagner's orchestration has banished . . . the 



role of the immediate production of sound from the aesthetic totality. . . . Anyone 
fully able to grasp why Haydn doubles the violins with a flute in piano might well 
get an intuitive glimpse into why, thousands of years ago, men gave up eating 
uncooked grain and began to bake bread, or why they started to smooth and 
polish their tools. All trace of its own production should ideally disappear from 
the object of consumption. It should look as though it had never been made, so as 
not to reveal that the one who sells it did not in fact make it, but rather appropri- 
ated to himself the labor that went into it. The autonomy of art has its origin in 
the concealment of labor." 62 [X13a]