[Photography] 

Sun, look out for yourself! 

—A.J. Wiertz, Oeuvres litteraues (Paris, 1870), p. 374 

If one day the sun should sputter out, 
'Twill be a mortal who rekindles it. 

— Laurencin and Clairville, Le Roi Dagobert a I 'exposition de 1844, 
Theatre du Vaudeville, April 19, 1844 (Paris, 1844), p. 18 [lines 
spoken by the Genius of Industry] 



A prophecy from the year 1855: "Only a few years ago, there was horn to us a 
machine that has since become the glory of our age, and that day after day amazes 
the mind and startles the eye. / This machine, a century hence, will be the hrush, 
the piilctte, the colors, the craft, the practice, the patience, the glance, the touch, 
the paste, the glaze, the trick, the relief, the finish, the rendering. / A century 
hence, there will he no more hricklayers of painting; there will he only architects — 
painters in the full sense of the word. / And are we really to imagine that the 
daguerreotype has murdered art? No, it kills the work of patience, hut it does 
homage to the work of thought. / When the daguerreotype, this titan child, will 
have attained the age of maturity, when all its power and potential will have been 
unfolded, then the genius of art will suddenly seize it hy the collar and exclaim: 
'Mine! You are mine now! We are going to work together.'" A. J. Wiertz, Oeu vres 
litteraires (Paris, 1870), p. 309. From an article, "La Photographie," that ap- 
peared for the first time in June 1855, in La Nation, and ended with a reference to 
the new invention of photographic enlargement, which makes it possible to pro- 
duce life-size photos. Bricklayer-painters are, for Wiertz, those "who apply them- 
selves to the material part only," who are good at "rendering." [Yl,l] 

Industrialization in literature. On Scribe. "Although he made fun of thebig indus- 
trialists and moneymen, he picked up the secret of their success. It did not escape 
hi s eagle eye that, in the last analysis, all wealth rests on the art »f getting others to 
work for us. So then, groundbreaking genius that he was, he transferred the 
principle of the division of lahor from the workshops of tailors, cahinetmakers, 
and manufacturers of pen nibs to the ateliers of dramatic: artists, who, before this 



reform, working with only their one head and one pen, had earned merely the 
proletarian wages of the isolated worker. An entire generation of theatrical gen- 
iuses were in his debt for their training and development, their awards, and, not 
infrequently, even their riches and reputation. Scribe chose the subject, sketched 
out the main lines of the plot, indicated the places for special effects and briJliant 
exits, and his apprentices would compose the appropriate dialogue or verses. Once 
they had made some progress, their name would appear on the title page (next to 
that of the firm) as a just recompense, until the best would break away and begin 
turning out dramatical works of their own invention, perhaps also in their turn 
recruiting new assistants. By these means, and under the protection afforded by 
the French publishing laws, Scribe became a multimillionaire." Friedrich Kreys- 
sig, Studien zur franzdsischen Cidtur- und Liter aturgeschichte (Berlin, 1865) 
<pp. 56-57 >. [Yl,2] 



Beginnings of the revue. "The French fairy plays 1 currently in vogue are practi- 
cally all of recent origin; they derive, for the most part, from the revues which 
were customarily put on during the first fortnight of the new year, and which were 
a sort of fantastic retrospective of the year preceding. The character of these 
theatricals was initially quite juvenile; they were tailored specifically to schoolchil- 
dren, whose new year's festivities woidd be enlivened by productions of this kind." 
Rudolf Gottschall, "Das Theater und Drama des Second Empire," Unsere Zeit: 
Deutsche Revue — Monatsschrift zum Konversationslexikon (Leipzig, 1867), 
p. 931. [Yl,3] 

From the start, to keep this thought in view and to weigh its constructive value: 
the refuse- and decay-phenomena as precursors, in some degree mirages, of the 
great syntheses that follow. These worlds <?> of static realities are to be looked for 
everywhere. Film, their center. D Historical Materialism D [Yl ,4] 



Fairy plays: "Thus, for example, in Parisiens « Londres (1866), the English indus- 
trial exhibition is brought to the stage and illustrated by a bevy of naked beauties, 
who naturally owe their appearance to allegory and poetic invention alone." 
Rudolf Gottschall, "Das Theater und Drama des Second Empire," Unsere Zeit: 
Deutsche Revue — Monatsschrift zum Konversationslexikon (Leipzig, 1867) 
p. 932. D Advertising D [Yla,l] 



"'Fermenters' are catalytic agents which provoke or accelerate the decomposition 
of relatively large quantities of other organic substances. . . . These 'other organic 
substances,' however, in reaction to which the fermenting agents manifest their 
destructive power, are the historically transmitted stylistic forms." "The fermen- 
ters . . . are the achievements of modern technology. They . . . can be grouped 
according to three great material divisions: (1) iron, (2) the art of machinery, (3) 
the art of light and fire." Alfred Gotthold Meyer, Eisenbauten (Esslingen, 1907), 
from the preface (unpaginated). [Yla,2] 



The photographic reproduction of artworks as a phase in the struggle between 
photography and painting. [Yl a,3] 



"In 1855, within the framework of the great exhibition of industry, special sections 
on photography were opened, making it possible for the fi rst time to familiarize a 
wider public with the new invention. This exhibition was, in fact, the overture to 
the industrial development of photography. . . . The public at the exhibition 
thronged before the numerous portraits of famous and noted personalities, and we 
can only imagine what it must have meant to that epoch suddenly to see before it, 
in so lifelike a form, the celebrated fi gures of the stage, of the podium — in short, of 
public life — who, up until then, could be gazed at and admired only from afar." 
Gisela Freund, "Entwicklung der Photographie in Frankreich" [manuscript]. 



Worthy of mention in the history of photography is the fact that the same Arago 
who made the famous expert report in favor of photography submitted, in that 
same year (?), 1838, an unfavorable report on the railroad construction planned 
by the government: "In 1838, when the government sent them the bill autho- 
rizing construction of railroad lines from Paris to Belgium, to le Havre, and to 
Bordeaux, the parliamentary reporter Arago recommended rejection, and his 
recommendation was approved by a vote of 160 to 90. Among other arguments, 
it was claimed that the difference in temperature at the entrance and exit of the 
tunnels would bring on mortal chills and fevers." Dubech and d'Espezel, Histoire 



Some successful stage plays from midcentury: Dennery, La Nuufrage <Ship- 
wreck> de La Perouse (1859), Le Tremblement de terre de Martinique (1843), Les 
Bohemiens de Paris (1843); Louis Franfois Clairville, Les Sept Chateaux du di- 
able (1844), Les Pommes de terre malades (1845), Rothomago (1862), Cendrillon 
<Cinderella> (1866). Others by Duveyrier, Dartois. A Kaspar Hauser by Den- 
nery? 2 [Yla,6] 

"The most fantastic creations of fairyland are near to heing realized before our 
very eyes. . . . Each day our factories turn out wonders as great as those produced 
by Doctor Faustus with his book of magic." Eugene Buret, De la Misere des classes 
laborieuses en France et en Angleterre (Paris, 184 0), vol. 2, pp. 161-162. [Y2,l] 

From Nadar's splendid description of bis photographic work in the Paris cata- 
combs: "With each new camera setup, we had to test our exposure time empiri- 
cally; certain of the plates were found to require up to eighteen minutes. — 
Remember, we were still, at that time, using collodion emulsion on glass nega- 
tives. ... I had judged it advisahle to animate some of these scenes by the use of 
a human figure — less from considerations of picturesqueness than in order to 
give a sense of scale, a precaution too often neglected by explorers in this medium 
and with sometimes disconcerting consequences. For these eighteen minutes of 



D Exhibitions D 



[Yla,4] 



de Paris (Paris, 1926), p. 386. 



[Yla,5] 



exposure time, I found it difficult to obtain from a human being the absolute, 
inorganic immobility I required. I tried to get round this difficulty by means of 
mannequins, which I dressed in workman's clothes and positioned in the scene 
with as little awkwardness as possible; this business did nothing to complicate 
our task. . . . This nasty ordeal of photographing in the sewers and catacombs, it 
must be said, lasted no less than three consecutive months. . . . Altogether, I 
brought back a hundred negatives. ... I made haste to offer the first hundred 
prints to the collections of the City of Paris put together by the eminent engineer 
of our subterranean constructions, M. Belgrand." Nadar, Quand j'etais photo- 
graphe (Paris <1900>), pp. 127-129.- 1 [Y2.2] 

Photography by artificial light with the aid of Bunsen elements. "I then had an 
experienced electrician install, on a solid part of my haleony overlooking the 
Boulevard des Capucines, the fifty medium-sized elements I'd been hoping for and 
which proved sufficient. . . . The regular retnrn, each evening, of this light (so 
little utilized at that time < 1860-1861 >) arrested the crowd on the boulevard and, 
drawn like moths to the (lame, a good many of the curious — both the friendly and 
the indifferent — came to climb up the stairs to our studio to find out what was 
going on there. These visitors (some well known or even famous) represented every 
social class; they were the more welcome insofar as they furnished us with a free 
supply of models, variously disposed toward the novel experience. It was thus that 
I managed to photograph, during these evening affairs, Nicpce de Saint- 
Victor, . . . Gustave Dore, . . . the financiers E. Pereire, Mires, Halphen, and 
many others." Nadar, Quand j'etais photographe (Paris), pp. 113, 115-116. 

[Y2,3] 

At the end of the grand prospectus Nadar offers on the state of the sciences: "Here 
we are, well beyond even the admirable assessment of Fourcroy, at the hour su- 
preme when the genius of the nation, in mortal danger, calls for discoveries." 
Nadar, Quand j'etais photographe , p. 3. [Y2,4] 

Nadar reproduces the Balzacian theory of the daguerreotype, which in turn 
derives from the Democritean theory of the eidola. (Nadar seems to be unac- 
quainted with the latter; he never mentions it.) Gautier and Nerval would have 
conformed to Balzac's opinion, "but even while speaking of specters, both of 
them . . . were among the very first to pass before our lens." Nadai", Quand j'etais 
photographe, p. 8. <Compare Y8a,l.> [Y2a,l] 

From whom does the conception of progress ultimately stem? From Condorcet? 
At any rate, by the end of the eighteenth century it does not yet appear to have 
taken very firm root. In the course of his eristic, among various suggestions for 
disposing of an adversary, Herault de Sechelles includes the following: "Lead 
him astray through questions of moral freedom and progress to the infinite." 
Herault de Sechelles, Theorie de ('ambition (<Paris,> 1927), p. 132. [Y2a,2] 



1848: "The revolution . . . arose in the midst of a very severe economic crisis, 
provoked, on the one hand, hy the speculations occasioned by railroad construe- 



tion and, on the other hand, by two consecutive bad harvests, in 1846 and 1847. 
Once again the city of Paris, . . . as far out as the faubourg Saint-Antoine, was torn 
hy hunger riots." A. Malet and P. Grillet, XIX" Siecle (Paris, 1919), p. 245. 

[Y2a,3] 

Declaration regarding Ludovic Halevy: "You may attack me on any grounds you 
like — but photography, no, that is sacred." Jean Loize, "Emile Zola photogra- 
phe," Arts et metiers graphiqu.es, 45 (Fehruary 15, 1935) <p. 35>. [Y2a,4] 

"Whoever, at some point in his life, has had the chance to slip his head under the 
magic mantle of the photographer, and has peered into the camera so as to catch 
sight of that extraordinary miniature reproduction of the natural image — such a 
person will necessarily . . . have asked himself what is likely to come of our modern 
painting once photography has succeeded in fixing colors on its plates as well as 
forms." Walter Crane, "Nachahmung und Ausdruck in der Kunst," < trans. Otto 
Wittich,> Die neue Zeit, 14, no. 1 (Stuttgart < 1895-1896 >), p. 423. [Y2a,5] 

The effort to launch a systematic confrontation between art and photography 
was destined to founder at the outset. It could only have been a moment in <the> 
confrontation between art and technology — a confrontation brought about by 
history. [Y2 a ,6] 

The passage on photography from Lemercier's Lampelie et Daguerre: 

As, menaced by the hirdcatcher's pitiless nets, 
The meadowlark, rousing the muses of morning, 
Flutters and foolishly comes to alight on a 
Lark-mirror, reef of its dalliances, 
So Lampelie's (= sunlight's) flight is cut short 
By the chemical snare of Baguerre. 
The face of a crystal, convex or concave, 
Will reduce or enlarge every object it marks. 
Its fine, lucid rays, through the depths of the trap, 
Catch the aspect of places in rapid inscription: 
The image imprisoned within the glass plate, 
Preserved from all threatening contact, 
Retains its bright life; and certain reflections 
Break through to the most distant spheres. 

Nepomucene Lemercier, Sur la Decouverte de I'ingenieux peintre du diorama 
[Annual Puhlic Session of the Five Academies, Thursday, May 2, 1839 (Paris, 
1839), pp. 30-31], < Compare Q3a,l. > [Y3,l] 

"Photography . . . was first adopted within the dominant social class . . . : manu- 
facturers, factory owners and bankers, statesmen, men of letters, and scientists." 
Gisela Freund, "La Photographie au point de vue sociologique" (manuscript, 
p. 32). Is this accurate? Shouldn't the sequence be reversed? [Y3,2] 



Among the inventions that predate photography one should mention, in particu- 
lar, the lithograph (invented in 1805 by Alois Senef elder and introduced into 
France some years later by Philippe de Lasteyrie) and the physionotrace, which, 
for its part, represents a mechanization of the process of cutting silhouettes. 
"Gilles Louis Chretien, ... in 1786, . . . successfully invented an apparatus which 
. . . combined two different modes of making portraits : that of the silhouette and 
that of the engraving. . . . The physionotrace was based on the well-known prin- 
ciple of the pantograph. A system of parallelograms was articulated in such a way 
as to be capable of transfer to a horizontal plane. With the aid of a dry stylus, the 
operator traces the contours of a drawing. An inked stylus traces the lines of the 
first stylus, and reproduces the drawing on a scale determined by the relative 
position of the two styluses." Gisela Freund, "La Photographie au point de vue 
sociologique" (manuscript, pp. 19-20). The apparatus was equipped with a 
viewfinder. Life-size reproductions could be obtained. [Y3,3] 

The reproduction time with the physionotrace was one minute for normal sil- 
houettes, three minutes for colored ones. It is characteristic that the beginnings of 
the technologizing of the portrait, as instanced in this apparatus, set back the art 
of the portrait qualitatively as much as photography later advanced it. "One can 
see, on examining the quite enormous body of work produced with the 
physionotrace, that the portraits all have the same expression: stiff, schematic, 
and featureless. . . . Although the apparatus reproduced the contours of the face 
with mathematical exactitude, this resemblance remained expressionless because 
it had not been realized by an artist." Gisela Freund, "La Photographie au point 
de vue sociologique" (manuscript, p. 25). It would have to be shown here just 
why this primitive apparatus, in contrast to the camera, excluded "artistry." 

[Y3a,l] 

"In Marseilles, around 1850, there were at most four or five painters of mini- 
atures, of whom two, perhaps, had gained a certain reputation hy executing fifty 
portraits in the course of a year. These artists earned just enough to make a 
living. ... A few years later, there were forty to fifty photographers in Mar- 
seilles. . . . They each produced, on the average, between 1,000 and 1,200 plates 
per year, which they sold for 15 francs apiece; this made for yearly receipts of 
18,000 francs, so that, together, they constituted an industry earning nearly a 
million. And this same development can be seen in all the major cities of France." 
Gisela Freund, "La Photographie au point de vue sociologique" (manuscript, 
pp. 15-16), citing Vidal, Memoire de la seance du 15 novembre 1868 de la Societe 
Statistique de Marseille. Reproduced in the Bulletin de la Societe franqaise de 
Photographie (1871), pp. 37, 38, 40. [Y3a,2] 

On the interlinking of technological inventions: "When he wanted to experiment 
with lithography, Niepce, who lived in the country, ran into the greatest difficulties 
in procuring the necessary stones. It was then that he got the idea of replacing the 
stones with a metal plate and the crayon with sunlight." Gisela Freund, "La Pho- 



tographie au point de vue sociologique" (manuscript, p. 39), in reference to Victor 
Fouque, Niepce: La Verite sur Vinvention de la photographie (Chalons sur Saone, 
1867). [Y3a,3] 



Following Arago's report to the Chamher: "A few hours later, opticians' shops 
were hesieged; there were not enough lenses, not enough camera ohscuras to sat- 
isfy the zeal of so many eager amateurs. They watched with regretful eye the 
setting sun on the horizon, as it carried away the raw material of the experiment. 
But on the morrow, during the first hours of the day, a great number of these 
experimenters could he seen at their windows, striving, with all sorts of anxious 
precautions, to capture on a prepared plate the image of a dormer-window oppo- 
site, or the view of a group of chimneys." Louis Figuier, La Photographie: Exposi- 
tion et histoire des principales decouvertes scientifiques modemes (Paris, 1851); 
cited, without page reference, hy Gisela Freund (manuscript, p. 46). [Y4,l] 

In 1840, Maurisset puhlished a caricature of photography. [Y4,2] 

"In the area of portraiture, a concern with 'situation' and the 'position' of a man, 
a concern that demands from the artist the representation of a 'social condition' 
and an 'attitude, 1 can he satisfied, in the end, only with a full-length portrait." 
Wilhelm Watzold, Die Kunst des Portrats (Leipzig, 1908), p. 186; cited in Gisela 
Freund (manuscript, p. 105). [Y4,3] 

Photography in the age of Disderi: "The characteristic accessories of a photo- 
graphic studio in 1865 are the pillar, the curtain, and the pedestal table. Posed 
there, leaning, seated, or standing up, is the subject to be photographed: full- 
length, half-length, or bust. The background is rilled, according to the social rank 
of the model, with other paraphernalia, symbolic and picturesque." Further on 
comes a very characteristic extract (without page reference) from L'Art de la 
photographie (Paris, 1862), by Disderi, who says, among other things: "In making 
a portrait, it is not a question only ... of reproducing, with a mathematical 
accuracy, the fonns and proportions of the individual; it is necessary also, and 
above all, to grasp and represent, while justifying and embellishing, . . . the inten- 
tions of nature toward this individual." Gisela Freund, "La Photographie au 
point de vue sociologique" (manuscript, pp. 106, 108). — The pillars: emblem of 
a "well-rounded education." D Haussmannization 0 [Y4,4] 

Gisela Freund (manuscript, pp. 116-117) provides the following citation from Dis- 
deri's L'Art de la photographie: "Could not the photographer who was a master of 
all the effects of lighting, who had at his disposal a large and perfectly equipped 
studio with hlinders and reflectors, who was provided with hackdrops of all kinds, 
with settings, properties, costumes — could he not, given intelligent and skillfully 
dressed models, compose tableaux de. genre, historical scenes? Could he not aspire 
to sentiment, like Scheffer, or to style, like Ingres? Could he not treat of history, 



like Paul Delaroche in his painting The Death of the Due de Guise?" At the world 
exhibition of 1855, there were some photographs of this sort produced in England. 

[Y4a,l] 

The paintings of Delacroix escape the competition with photography, not only 
because of the impact of their colors, but also (in those days, there was no instant 
photography) because of the stormy agitation of their subject matter. And so a 
benevolent interest in photography was possible for him. [Y4a,2] 

What makes the first photographs so incomparable is perhaps this: that they 
present the earliest image of the encounter of machine and man. [Y4a,3] 

One of the — often unspoken — objections to photography: that it is impossible 
for the human countenance to be apprehended by a machine. Tliis the sentiment 
of Delacroix in particular. [Y4a,4] 

"Yvon, . . . pupil of Delaroche, . . . decided, one day, to reproduce the Battle of 
Solf erino. . . . Accompanied by the photographer Bisson, he goes to the Tuileries, 
gets the emperor to strike the right sort of pose, has him turn his head, and bathes 
everything in the light he wishes to reproduce. The painting that resulted in the 
end was acclaimed under the title The Emperor in a Kepi." Following this, a 
courtroom battle between the painter and Bisson, who had put his photo on the 
market. He is convicted. Gisela Freund, "La Photographie au point de vue soci- 
ologique" (manuscript, p. 152). [Y4a,5] 

Passing by the house of Disderi, Napoleon III halts a regiment he is leading down 
the boulevard, goes upstairs, and has himself photographed. [Y4a,6] 

In his capacity as president of the Societe des Gens de Lettres, Balzac proposed 
that all of the works of the twelve greatest living French authors should automat- 
ically he bought by the state. (Compare Daguerre.) [Y4a,7] 

"At the Cafe Hamelin, . . . some photographers and night owls." Alfred Delvau, 
Les Heures parisiennes (Paris, 1866), p. 184 ("Une Heure du matin"). [Y5,l] 

On Nepomucene Lemercier: "The man who spoke this pedantic, absurd, and bom- 
bastic idiom certainly never understood the age in which he lived. . . . Could any- 
one have done a better job of distorting contemporary events with the aid of 
outmoded images and expressions?" Alfred Michiels, Histoire des idees litteraires 
en France au XlX e siecle (Paris, 1863), vol. 2, pp. 36-37. [Y5,2] 

On the rise of photography. — Communications technology reduces the informa- 
tional merits of painting. At the same time, a new reality unfolds, in the face of 
which no one can take responsibility for personal decisions. One appeals to the 
lens. Painting, for its part, begins to emphasize color. [Y5,3] 



"Steam" — "Last word of him who died on the Cross!" Maxime Du Camp, Les 
Chants modernes (Paris, 1855), p. 260 ["La Vapeur"]. [Y5,4] 



In "La Vapeur," part 3, Du Camp celebrates steam, chloroform, electricity, gas, 
photography. Maxime Du Camp, Les Chants modernes (Paris, 1855), pp. 265- 
272. "La Faulx" <The Scythe) celebrates the reaper. [Y5,5] 

The first two stanzas, and the fourth, from "La Bobine" < The Bobbin> : 

INear the cascading river — 

Each of its breakwaters 

A swirling relay station — 

In the midst of green meadows, 

And the flowering alfalfa, 

They have raised up my palace — 

My palace of a thousand windows, 
My palace of rustic vines 
Which climb to the rooftops, 
My palace where, without repose, 
The nimble wheel booms out its song, 
The wheel of rackety voice! 

Like those vigilant elves of Norway 

Who waltz across the snows 

To escape the sprite that stalks them, 

I turn, I turn, I turn! 

Through the hours of day, never resting, 

I turn, and I turn through the night! 

Maxime Du Camp, Les Chants modernes (Paris, 1855), pp. 285-286. [Y5,6] 

"La Locomotive": "One day I shall be named a saint." Maxime Du Camp, Les 
Chants modernes (Paris, 1855), p. 301. This poem, like others, from the cycle 
"Chants de la matiere." [Y5,7] 

"The press, that immense and sacred locomotive of progress." Victor Hugo, 
speech at the banquet of September 16, 1862, organized by the publishers of Les 
Miserables in Brussels. Cited in Georges Batault, Le Pontife de la demagogic 
Victor Hugo (Paris, 1934), p. 131. [Y5,8] 

It is a century that does us honor, 
The century of inventions; 
Unfortunately, it is also 
The century of revolutions. 

<Louis> Clairville and Jules Cordier, Le Palais de Cristal, on Les Pmrisiens a 
Londres, Theatre de la Porte Saint-Martin, May 26, 1851 (Paris, 1851), p. 31. 

[Y5a,l] 



Self-portrait by Nadar. Courtesy of the J. Paul Getty Museum, Los Angeles. See Y5a,5. 

A locomotive pulling "several elegant coaches" appears on the stage. Clairville the 
elder and Delatour, 1837 aux enfers, Theatre du Luxemhonrg, Decemher 30, 1837 
(Paris, 1838) <p. 16>. [Y5a,2] 

lb be demonstrated: the influence of lithography on the literary genre of pano- 
ramas. What, in the case of the lithograph, is perfunctory individual charac- 
terization often becomes, with the writer, equally perfunctory generalization. 

[Y5a,3] 



Fournel, in 1858 ("Ce qu'on voit dans les rues de Paris"), reproaches the da- 
guerreotype for being unable to embellish. Disderi is waiting in the wings. On 



the other hand, Fournel condemns the conventional poses that relied on props 
such as Disderi had introduced. [Y5a,4] 



Without indicating his source, Delvau cites this description of Nadar's appear- 
ance: "His hair has the reddish glow of a setting sun; its reflection spreads across 
his face, where bouquets of curly and contentious locks spill this way and that, 
unruly as fireworks. Extremely dilated, the eyehall rolls, testifying to a truly un- 
appeasable curiosity and a perpetual astonishment. The voice is strident; the 
gestures are those of a Nuremberg doll with a fever." Alfred Delvau, Les Lions du 
jour (Paris, 1867), p. 219. [Y5 a ,5] 

Nadar, speaking of himself: "A born rebel where all bondage is concerned, impa- 
tient of all proprieties, having never been able to answer a letter within two years, 
an outlaw in all houses where you cannot put your feet up before the fire, and 
finally — so that nothing should be lacking, not even a last physical defect, to 
complete the measure of all these amiable qualities and win him more good 
friends — nearsighted to the point of blindness and consequently liable to the most 
insulting amnesia in the presence of any face which he has not seen more than 
twenty-five times at a distance of fifteen centimeters from his nose." Cited in Al- 
fred Delvau, Les Lions dujour (Paris, 1867), p. 222. [Y5a,6] 

Inventions from around 1848: matches, stearin candles, steel pens. [Y5a,7] 

Invention of the mechanical press in 1814. It was first utilized by the Times. 

[Y5a,8] 

Nadar's self-characterization: "Formerly a maker of caricatures . . ., ultimately a 
refugee in the Botany Bay of photography." Cited in Alfred Delvau, Les Lions du 
jour (Paris, 1867), p. 220. [Y6,l] 

On Nadar: "What will remain, one day, of the author of Le Miroir aux alouettes 
<Lark-Mirror> , of La Robe de Dejanire, of Quand j'etais etudiant? I do not 
know. What I do know is that, on a cyclopean pile on the island of Gozo, a Polish 
poet, Czeslaw Karski, has engraved in Arabic, but with Latin letters, 'Nadar of 
the fi ery locks passed in the air above this tower,' and that the inhabitants of the 
island very likely still have not left off worsluping him as an unknown God." 
Alfred Delvau, Les Lions du jour (Paris, 1867), pp. 223-224. [Y6,2] 

Genre photography: the sculptor Callimachus, on viewing an acanthus plant, in- 
vents the Corinthian capital. — Leonardo paints the Mona Lisa. — La Gloire et le 
pot aufeu <Glory and Beef Stew > . Cabinet des Estampes, Kc 164a, 1. [Y6,3] 




An English etching of 1775, a genre scene, shows an artist making a silhouette of 
<her> model by following the shadow which the latter casts on the wall. It is 
entitled The Origin of Painting. Cabinet des Estampes, Kc 164a, 1. [Y6,4] 



NADAR eievari: !a PhotG^raphie a k bmlm k 1'Art 

Nadar in his balloon. Lithograph by Honore Daumier, 1862. The caption reads: 
"Nadar raising photography to the level of art." See Y6,2. 

There is a certain relation between the invention of photography and the inven- 
tion of the mirror-stereoscope by Wheatstone in 1838. "It displays two different 
images of the same object: to the right eye, an image representing the object in 
perspective as it would be seen from the viewpoint of the right eye; to the left eye, 
an image of the object as it would appear to the left eye. This gives rise to the 
illusion that we have . . . before us a three-dimensional object" (Egon Friedell, 
Kulhtrgeschichte der Neuieit, vol. 3 [Munich, 1931], p. 139). The exactness re- 



quired of the images forming the material for this stereoscope would correspond 
more readily to photography than to painting. [Y6,5] 

The apparent affinity between Wiertz and Edgar Quinet needs to be studied. 

[Y6,6] 

"The lens is an instrument like the pencil or the brush, and photography is a 
process like drawing or engraving; for what the artist creates is the emotion and 





The Origin of Fainting. Etching by an English artist, 1775. Courtesy of the Bibliotheque 
Nationale de France. See Y6,4. 



not the process. Whoever possesses the necessary skills and happy inspiration will 
be able to obtain the same effects from any one of these means of reproduction." 
Louis Figuier, La Photographie au Salon de 1859 (Paris, 1860), pp. 4-5. [Y6,7] 



"M. Quinet . . . seemed to want to introduce into poetry the sort of genre that the 
English painter <John> Martin inaugurated in art. . . . The poet . . . did not 
shrink from having the cathedrals kneel before the sepulcher of Our Lord, and 
showing the towns absorbed in combing out upon their shoulders, with a comh of 
gold, their tresses of blond columns, while the towers danced a strange roundelay 
with the mountains." Alfred Nettement, Histoire de la litterature francaise sous le 
gouvernement de Juillet (Paris, 1859), vol. 1, p. 131. [Y6a,l] 

"At the world exhibition of 1855, photography, despite its lively claims, could gain 
no entry into the sanctuary of the hall on the Avenue Montaigne; it was condemned 
to seek asylum in the immense bazaar of assorted products that filled the Palais de 
lTndustrie. In 1859, under growing pressure, the museum committee . . . ac- 
corded a place in the Palais de lTndustrie for the exhibition of photography; the 
exhibition site was on a level with that made availahle to painting and engraving, 
but it had a separate entrance and was set, so to speak, in a different key." Louis 
Figuier, La Photographie au Salon de 1859 (Paris, 1860), p. 2. [Y6a,2] 

"A skillful photographer always has a distinctive style, just like a draftsman or a 
painter; . . . and, what's more, . . . the distinctive character of the artistic spirit of 
each nation is clearly revealed ... in the works produced in different coun- 
tries. ... A French photographer could never be confused . . . with one of his 
colleagues from across the Channel." Louis Figuier, La Photographie au Salon de 
1859 (Paris, 1860), p. 5. [Y6a,3] 

The beginnings of photomontage come out of the attempt to ensure that images 
of the landscape retain a painterly character. "M. Silvy has an excellent system 
for producing his pictures. . . . Instead of imposing, on all his landscapes indiffer- 
ently, one and the same sky formed from a uniform negative, he takes the 
trouble, wherever possible, of separately enhancing, one after the other, the view 
of the landscape and that of the sky which crowns it. Here resides one of the 
secrets of M. Silvy." Louis Figuier, La Photographie au Salon de 1859 (Paris, 
1860), p. 9. [Y6a,4] 

It is significant that Figuier's booklet on the Salon of Photography of 1859 begins 
with a review of landscape photography. [Y6a,5] 

At the Salon de Photographie of 1859, numerous "voyages": to Egypt, to Jerusa- 
lem, to Greece, to Spain. In his account, Figuier observes: "Hardly had the prac- 
tical processes of photography on paper come to be understood than a whole band 
of operators rushed forth ... in all directions, to bring us back views of monu- 
ments, buildings, and ruins taken in all known lands of the world." Hence the new 



voyages photo graphiques. Louis Figuier, La Photographie au Salon de 1859, 
p. 35. [Y6a,6] 



Among the works of reproduction to which Figuier gives special attention, in his 
Photographie au Salon, are the reproduction of the Raphael cartoon from Hamp- 
ton Court — "the work . . . that dominates the entire photographic exhibition of 
1859" (p. 51) — and that of a manuscript of Ptolemy's Geography dating from the 
fourteenth century and kept, at that time, in the monastery of Mount Athos. 

[Y7,l] 

There were portraits specifically designed to be viewed through the stereoscope. 
This fashionwas current in England, above all. [ Y7,2] 

Figuier (pp. 77-78) does not omit to mention the possibility that "microscopic 
photographs" could be used in time of war to transmit secret messages (in the form 
of miniature telegrams). [Y7,3] 

"One thing . . . made clear by a careful inspection of the exhibition , , . is the 
present perfection ... of the positive proof. Five or six years ago, photography 
was almost exclusively concerned with the negative, . . . and it was rare indeed 
that anyone gave thought to the utility of printing from a positive image." Louis 
Figuier, La Photographie au Salon de 1859 (Paris, 1860), p. 83. [Y7,4] 

Symptom, it would seem, of a profound displacement: painting must submit to 
being measured by the standard of photography: will be in agreement with 
the public in admiring . . . the fine artist who . . . has appeared this year with a 
painting capable of holding its own, in point of delicacy, with daguerrian prints." 
This assessment of Meissonnier is from Auguste Galimard, Examen du Salon de 
1849 (Paris <1850>), p. 95. [Y7,5] 

"Photography in verse" — synonym for a description in verse. Edouard Fournier, 
Chroniques et le.gendes des rues de Paris (Paris, 1864), pp. 14-15. [Y7,6] 

"The world's fi rst movie theater opened on December 28, 1895, in the basement of 
the Grand Cafe, 14 Boulevard des Capucines, in Paris. And the first receipts for a 
brand of spectacle that would later net billions amounted to the considerable sum 
of thirty-live francs!" Roland Villiers, Le Cinema et ses merveilles (Paris <1930>), 
pp. 18-19. [Y7,7] 

"The year 1882 must be mentioned as a turning point in the history of photo- 
graphic reportage. It was the year in which the photographer Ottomar Anschiitz, 
from Leszno in Poland, invented the focal-plane shutter and thus made possible 
truly instantaneous photography." Europaische Dokumente: Historische Photos 
aus den Jahren 1840-1900, eel. Wolfgang Schade (Stuttgart, Berlin, Leipzig), 
p. [v]. [Y7.8] 



The first photographic interview was conducted hy Nadar with the ninety-seven- 
year-old French chemist Chevreul, in 1886. Europaische Dokumente: Historische 
Photos aus den Jahren 1840-1900, ed. Wolfgang Schade (Stuttgart, Berlin, 
Leipzig), p. 8-9. ' [Y7,9] 

"The first experiment to launch research into scientifically produced motion . . . 
was that of Doctor Pares in 1825. The details are well known: on one side of a small 
square of cardhoard, he had drawn a cage, and on the other side, a bird; by 
turning the piece of cardhoard briskly on an axis, ... he cansed the two images to 
appear in succession, yet the bird seemed to be in the cage, just as though there 
had been only one drawing. This phenomenon, which in itself is the basis of all 
cinema, depends on the principle of the persistence of retinal impressions. . . . 
Once this principle is admitted, it is easy to understand that a movement decom- 
posed, and presented in a rhythm of ten images or more per second, is perceived 
by the eye as a perfectly continuous movement. The first apparatus that actually 
wrought the miracle of artificial motion is the Phenakistiscope, constructed by the 
Belgian physician Plateau as early as 1833. Still known today as an optical toy, 
this apparatus . . . consisted of a disk on which were mounted drawings repre- 
senting the successive phases of an action, whieh could be observed as the disk was 
rotated. . . . There ... is an obvious relation here to the animated cartoons of 
today. . . . Researchers quickly saw . . . the interest in having ... a succession of 
photographs substituted for the drawings. Unfortunately, . . . only images running 
at the minimum speed of a tenth of a second could work with such a design. For 
this, we had to await the gelatinobromide plates that permitted the first instanta- 
neous exposures. It was astronomy that initially provided an occasion for testing 
chronophotography. On December 8, 1874, thanks to the passage of the planet 
Venus past the sun, the astronomer <Pierre> Janssen was able to try out his 
invention of a photographic revolver, which took a picture every seventy sec- 
onds. . . . But the process of chronophotography was soon to become much more 
rapid. ... It was . . . when Professor Marey entered the lists with his photographic 
rifle . . . that the result of twelve images per second was obtained. . . . All these 
experiments were, up to then, purely scientific (!) in character. The researchers 
who conducted them . . . saw in chronophotography a simple 'means for analyzing 
the movements of humans and animals.' ... At this point, in 1891, we meet with 
. . . Edison, who had constructed two devices. One, the Kinetograph, was for 
recording; the other, the Kinetoscope, was for projection. . . . Meanwhile, in 1891, 
Marey's collaborator, < Georges> Demeny, had built a machine that allowed for the 
recording of pictures and sound at the same time. His Phonoscope . . . was the first 
talkie." Roland Villiers, he Cinema et ses merveilles (Paris <1930>), pp. 9-16 
("Petite Histoire du cinema"). [Y7a, 1] 

"Let us take as an example of technical progress, which actually is regress, the 
perfection of photographic devices. They are much more sensitive to light than the 
old boxes with which daguerreotypes were produced. One hardly need concern 
oneself about lighting when operating them now. They have a number of other 



advantages to boot, especially where photographing faces is concerned, although 
the portraits which one makes with them are doubtless much poorer than before. 
With the older, less light-sensitive apparatus, multiple expressions would appear 
on the plate, which was exposed for rather long periods of time; hence, on the final 
image there would be a livelier and more universal expression, and this had its 
function as well. Nevertheless, it would most certainly be false to regard the new 
devices as worse than the older ones. Perhaps something is missing from them 
which tomorrow will be found, and one can always do other things with them 
besides photographing faces. Yet what of the faces? The newer devices no longer 
work to compose the faces — but must faces be composed? Perhaps for these de- 
vices there is a photographic method which would decompose faces. But we can be 
quite sure of never linding this possibility realized . . . without fi rst having a new 
function for such photography." Brecht, Versuche <8-10 (Berlin, 1931)>, p. 280 
("Der Dreigroschenprozefi" <The Threepenny Lawsuit>). [Y8,l] 

The Bisson brothers, on the occasion of the visit by Napoleon III to their photo- 
graphic studio on December 29, 1856 — a visit which they say coincided with the 
eleventh anniversary of the opening of their business — published in pamphlet 
form a poem entitled, "Souvenir de la visite de Leurs Majestes l'Empereur et 
lTmperatrice aux magasins de Messieurs Bisson freres." The pamphlet comprises 
four pages. The first two pages contain another poem, "La Photographic." Both 
texts are unrelievedly fatuous. [Y8,2] 

"It is worth noting that the better photographers of our day are not concerned to 
belabor the question . . . : 'Is photography an art?' ... By their aptitude for 
creating the evocative shock, [these photographers] prove their power of expres- 
sion, and that is their revenge for the skepticism of Daumier." George Besson, La 
Photographief ran^aise (Paris <1936>), pp. 5-6. [Y8,3] 

The famous statement by Wiertz on photography can very likely be elucidated 
through the following statement by Wey (of course, it becomes clear by this that 
Wiertz's prognosis was mistaken): "In reducing to naught whatever is inferior to 
it, the heliograph predestines art to new forms of progress; in recalling the artist 
to nature, it links him with a source of inspiration whose fecundity is unlimited." 
Francis Wey, "Du Naturalisme dans 1'art" [La Lwniere, April 6, 1851]; cited in 
Gisele Freund, La Photographic en France an XIX' siecle (Paris, 1936), p. 111. 

[Y8,4] 

"If we consider only the practical side of divination, then to believe that previous 
events in a man's life . . . can be directly represented by the cards he shuffles and 
cuts, antl which are then stacked by the fortuneteller in accordance with some 
mysterious laws, is to believe the absurd. But this criterion of absurdity once ruled 
out the harnessing of steam; it still rules out aerial navigation; it ruled out many 
inventions: gunpowder, printing, the telescope, engraving, and also the most re- 
cent great discovery of our time, the daguerreotype. If anyone had come and told 
Napoleon that a man or a building is incessantly, and at all hours, represented by 



an image in the atmosphere, that all existing objects have there a kind of specter 
which can be captured and perceived, he would have consigned him to Charenton 
as a lunatic. . . . Yet that is what Daguerre's discovery proved." Honore de Balzac, 
he Cousin Pons, in Oeuvres completes, vol. 18, La Comedie humaine: Scenes de la 
vie parisienne, 6 (Paris, 1914), pp. 129-130. "Just as physical objects in fact 
project themselves onto the atmosphere, so that it retains this specter which the 
daguerreotype can fix and capture, in the same way ideas . . . imprint themselves 
on what we must call the atmosphere of the spiritual world, . . . and live on in it 
spectrally (one must coin words in order to express unnamed phenomena). If that 
be granted, certain creatures endowed with rare faculties are perfectly capahle of 
discerning these forms or these traces of ideas" (ibid., p. 132). 5 [Y8a,l] 

"Degas was the lirst to attempt, in his pictures, the representation of rapid move- 
ment such as we get in instantaneous photography." Wladimir Weidle, Les Abeilles 
d'Aristee (Paris <1936>), p. 185 ("L' Agonic de Tart"). [Y8a,2] 

What author is being cited by Montesquiou in the following passage, which is taken 
from a handwritten text forming part of a richly ornamented volume of memora- 
hilia shown in a display case at the Guys exhibition, in Paris, in the spring of 1937? 
"And that, in a few hasty words, is how it was: the first exhibition of Constantin 
Guys — newest surprise to be served up to us from his treasure-box of malice by 
M. Nadar,' 1 the famous aeronaut and (should I say?) illustrious photographer. 
Surely, this ingenious spirit, steeped in the past, has a right to that title, in its 
noblest acceptation, and according to the admirable definition provided hy a pow- 
erful and subtle thinker, in the course of some sublime pages: 'Humanity has also 
invented, in its evening peregrinations — that is to say, in the nineteenth century — 
the symbol of memory; it has invented what had seemed impossible; it has invented 
a mirror that remembers. It has invented photography. '" <Ernest Hello, L 'Homme 
(Paris 1872), p. 172> [Y8a,3] 

"At no time in the past has art responded to aesthetic exigencies alone. The 
Gothic sculptors served God in working for his faithful; the portraitists aimed at 
verisimilitude; the peaches and the hares of a Chardin had their place in the 
dining room, above the family dinner table. Individual artists in certain cases 
(and they were few and far between, to be sure) may have suffered from this state 
of affairs; art as a whole could only profit from it. This is the way it has been 
throughout all the great artistic epochs. In particular, the naive conviction that 
they were only 'copying nature' was as salutary for the painters of those fortu- 
nate epochs as it was theoretically unjustifiable. The old Dutch masters looked 
upon themselves less as artists than as photographers, so to speak; it is only 
today that the photographer is absolutely determined to pass for an artist. For- 
merly, an engraving was above all a document, less exact (on the average) and 
more artistic than a photograph, but having the same function, fulfilling by and 
large the same practical role." Together with this important insight we have, from 
this author, another no less important, according to which the photographer is 
distinguished from the graphic artist not through the fundamentally greater real- 



ism of his works, but through a more highly mechanized technique, which does 
not necessarily diminish his artistic activity. None of this prevents the author 
from going on to say: "What is unfortunate [my italics] is not that today's photog- 
rapher believes himself an artist; what is unfortunate is that he actually has at 
his disposal certain resources proper to the art of the painter." Wladimir Weidle, 
Les Abeilles d'Amtee (Paris), pp. 181-182, 184 ("LAgonie de l'art"). Compare 
Jochmann on the epic poem: "The general interest which such a poem excites, 
the pride with wliich an entire people repeats it, its legislative authority over 
opinions and sentiments — all this is grounded in the fact that it is nowhere taken 
as a mere poem." [Carl Gustav Jochmaim,] Uber die Sprache (Heidelberg, 1828), 



In the period around 1845, illustrations arc already appearing in advertisements. 
On Jnly 6 of this year, the Societe Generale des Annonc.es, which handled publicite 
for he Journal des debats, he Constitutionnel, and La Presse, puhlishes a pro- 
spectus that says: "We call . . . your attention to the illustrations which, for some 
years now, a great many husinesses have heen in the hahit of joining to their 
announcements. The power of captivating the eye hy the form and disposition of 
the letters is perhaps less decisive than the advantage to be gained hy filling ont an 
often arid exposition with drawings and designs." P. Datz, Histoire de la publicite, 



In his "Morale du joujou" <Philosophy of Toys>, Baudelaire mentions, together 
with the stereoscope, the phenakistiscope. "The phenakistiscope, which is older, is 
less well known. Imagine some movement or other — for example, a dancer's or a 
juggler's performance — divided up and decomposed into a certain numher of 
movements. Imagine that each one of these movements — as many as twenty, if you 
wish — is represented by a complete figure of the juggler or dancer, and that these 
are all printed round the edge of a circular piece of cardhoard." Baudelaire then 
describes the mirror mechanism that enahles the viewer to see, in the twenty 
openings of an outer circle, twenty little figures moving rhythmically in a continu- 
ous action. Baudelaire, L'Art romantique (Paris), p. 146.' Compare Y7a,l. 



It was the pantograph, whose principle is equally at work in the physiognotrace, 
that undertook to transcrihe automatically a linear scheme originally traced on 
paper to a plaster mass, as required hy the process of photosculpture. Serving as 
model in this process were twenty-four simultaneous views taken from different 
sides. Gautier foresees no threat to sculpture from this process. What can prevent 
the sculptor from artistically enlivening the mechanically produced figure and its 
ground? "But there is more: for all its extravagance, the century remains economi- 
cal. Pure art seems to it something expensive. With the cheekiness of a parvenu, it 
sometimes dares to haggle over masterworks. It is terrified of marble and 
hronze. . . . But photosculpture is not so daunting as statuary. . . . Photosculpture 
is used to modest proportions and is content with a set of shelves for pedestal, 




[Y9.1] 



vol. 1 (Paris, 1.894), pp. 216-217. 



[Y9,2] 



[Y9a,l] 



happy to have faithfully reproduced a beloved countenance. ... It does not dis- 
dain an overcoat, and is not embarrassed by crinolines; it accepts nature and the 
world as they are. Its sincerity accommodates everything, and though its plaster 
casts of stearin can be transposed into marble, into terracotta, into alabaster, or 
into bronze, ... it never asks, in return for its work, what its elder sister would 
demand in payment; it requests only the cost of materials." Theophile Gautier, 
"Photosculpture: 42 Boulevard de 1'Etoile," <Le Moniteur universeb (Paris, 
< January 4,> 1864), pp. 10-11. The essay includes, at the end, a woodcut with 
photosculptures, one of which portrays Gautier. [ Y9a,2] 

"He refined the iJlusionary art of the panorama and invented the diorama. He 
joined forces with another painter, and on July 11, 1822, on the Rue de Sanson in 
Paris . . . , he opened an exhibition whose fame quickly spread. . . . This inventor 
and entrepreneur . . . was dubbed a knight in the Legion of Honor. Midnight Mass, 
the Temple of Solomon, Edinburgh in the sinister glow of a conllagration, and 
Napoleon's Tomb transfigured naturally by the aureole of a rosy sunset: such are 
the wonders that were shown here. A translator of Daguerre's own account of his 
two inventions (1839) portrays very nicely the multiplicity of lights involved, great 
and small, splendid, secret, and terrifying: 'The spectator sits in a small amphi- 
theater; the stage seems to liim covered by a curtain which is still bathed in dark- 
ness. Gradually, however, this darkness yields to a twilight . . . : a landscape or 
prospect emerges more clearly; the dawn is beginning. . . . Trees stand out from 
the shadows; the contours of mountains, of houses, become visible . . . ; the day 
has broken. The sun climbs ever higher; through the open wintlow of a house one 
sees a kitchen stove slowly llaming up, while in a corner of the landscape a group of 
campers is ranged round a cooking pot, under which the campfi re is beginning to 
blaze; a forge becomes visible, its furnace giving off sparks as though . . . from 
continuous stoking. After a while, . . . the daylight begins to wane, and the reddish 
luster of the artificial flame grows stronger; once again there is advancing twilight, 
and finally nocturnal gloom. Soon, however, the moonlight asserts its rights, and 
the region is visible anew in the soft tints of the illuminated night: a mariner's 
lantern Hares up on board a ship that is anchored in the foreground of a harbor; in 
the background of an admirahle perspective of a church, the candles on the altar 
are lighted, and the previously invisihle parishioners are now illuminated by the 
rays streaming down from the altar; or grief-stricken men are standing at the edge 
of a landslide, its devastations lit up hy the moon at the very spot where, shortly 
before, the Ruffiherg had formed the hackground to the lovely Swiss landscape 
of Goldau."' Cited as "Ubersetzer von Daguerres Schrift iiher seine beiden Er- 
findungen (1839)," in Dolf Sternherger, "Das wunderhare Licht: Zum 150 Ge- 
hurtstag Daguerres," Frankfurter Zeitung <21>, November 1937. [Y10,l] 

The entrance of the temporal factor into the panoramas is brought about 
through the succession of times of day (with well-known lighting tricks). In this 
way, the panorama transcends painting and anticipates photography. Owing to 
its technological formation, the photograph, in contrast to the painting, can and 



must be correlated with a well-defi ned and continuous segment of time (exposure 
time). In this chronological specifiability, the political significance of the photo- 
graph is already contained in mice. [ Y10,2] 



"In these deplorable times, a new industry has developed, which has helped in no 
small way to confirm fools in their faith and to ruin what vestige of the divine might 
still have remained in the French mind. Of course, this idolatrous multitude was 
calling for an ideal worthy of itself and in keeping with its own nature. In the 
domain of painting and statuary, the present-day credo of the worldly-wise ... is 
this: 'I believe . . . that art is, and can only be, the exact reproduction of na- 
ture. . . . Thus, if an industrial process could give us a result identical to nature, 
that would be absolute art.' An avenging God has heard the prayers of this multi- 
tude. Daguerre was his messiah. And then they said to themselves: 'Since photog- 
raphy provides us with every desirable guarantee of exactitude' (they believe that, 
poor madmen!), 'art is photography.' From that moment onward, our loathsome 
society rushed, like Narcissus, to contemplate its trivial image on the metallic 
plate. A form of lunacy, an extraordinary fanaticism, took hold of these new 
sun-worshippers. Strange abominations manifested themselves. By bringing to- 
gether and posing a pack of rascals, male and female, dressed up like carnival- 
time butchers and washerwomen, and in persuading these 'heroes' to 'hold' their 
improvised grimaces for as long as the photographic process required, people 
really believed they could represent the tragic and charming scenes of ancient 
history. ... It was not long before thousands of pairs of greedy eyes were glued to 
the peepholes of the stereoscope, as though they were the skylights of the infinite. 
The love of obscenity, which is as vigorous a growth in the heart of natural man as 
self-love, could notlet slip such a glorious opportunity for its own satisfaction. . . . 
[p. 223] ... I am convinced that the badly applied advances of photography — like 
all purely material progress, for that matter — have greatly contributed to the 
impoverishment of French artistic genius, already so rare. . . . Poetry and pro- 
gress are two ambitious men who hate each other with an instinctive hatred, and 
when they meet along the same road one of them must give way." Charles Baude- 
laire, Oeuvres <cd. Le Danteo, vol. 2 <Paris, 1932>, pp. 222-224 ("Salon de 
1859: Le Public moderne et la photographie"). 8 [YlOa.l] 

Baudelaire speaks, in "Quelques Caricaturistes frangais" (apropos of Monnier), 
of "the cruel and surprising charm of daguerreotypes." Charles Baudelaire, Oeu- 
vres, ed. Le Dantec, vol. 2, p. 197." [Yl0a,2] 

"Poetry and progress are two ambitious men who hate each other with an instinc- 
tive hatred, and when they meet along the same road, one of them must give way. If 
photography is allowed to supplement art in some of its functions, it will soon have 
supplanted or corrupted it altogether, thanks to the stupidity of the multitude 
which is its natural ally. It is time, then, for it to return to its true duty, which is to 
he the servant of the sciences and arts — hut the very humhle servant, like printing 
or shorthand, which have neither created nor supplemented literature. Let it 



hasten to enrich the tourist's album and restore to his eye the precision which his 
memory may lack; let it adorn the naturalist's library, and enlarge microscopic 
animals; let it even provide information to corroborate the astronomer's hypothe- 
ses. In short, let it be the secretary and clerk of whoever needs absolute factual 
exactitude in his profession — up to that point nothing could be better. Let it rescue 
from oblivion those tumbling ruins, those books, prints, and manuscripts which 
time is devouring, precious things whose form is dissolving and which demand a 
place in the archives of our memory — it will be thanked and applauded. But if it 
be allowed to encroach upon the domain of the impalpable and the imaginary, 
upon anything whose value depends solely upon the addition of something of a 
man's soul, then it will be so much the worse for us!" Charles Baudelaire, Oeuvres, 
ed. Le Dantec, vol. 2, p. 224 ("Salon de 1859: Le Public moderne et la pho- 



Cocteau's Les Manes de la tour Eiffel 11 can perhaps be considered a "critique of 
the snapshot," insofar as in this piece the two aspects of shock — its technological 
function in the mechanism and its sterilizing function in the experience — both 



tographie"). 10 



[Yll.l] 



come into play. 



[Y11.2] 