[The Doll, The Automaton] 

I was always, among human beings, the only doll 1 with a heart. 

— Amalie Winter, Memoiren einer Berliner Puppe,Jiir Kinder v*n 5 bis 10 
Jahren imd fur deren Mutter (Leipzig, 1852), p. 93 

Where, instead of the clock, the eyes indicate the hours. 

— Franz Dingelstedt, Ein Roman; cited in Adolf Strodtmann, Dichter- 
prtfile, vol. 1 (Stuttgart, 1879), p. Ill 



"The clever Parisiennes . . . , in order to disseminate their fashions more easily, 
made use of an especially conspicuous reproduction of their new creations — 
namely, tailors' dummies. . . . These dolls, which still enjoyed considerable impor- 
tance in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, were given to little girls as 
playthings when their career as fashion figurines had ended." Karl Groher, Kin- 
derspielzeug aus alter Zeit (Berlin, 1927), pp. 31-32. D Fashion □ Advertising D 

[Zl.l] 



They are the true fairies of these arcades (more salable and more worn than the 
life-sized ones): the formerly world-famous Parisian dolls, which revolved on 
their musical socle and bore in their arms a doll-sized basket out of which, at the 
salutation of the minor chord, a lambkin poked its curious muzzle. When Hack- 
lander made use of this "newest invention of industrial luxury" for one of his 
fairy tales, he too placed the marvelous dolls in the dangerous arcade which sister 
Tinchen, at the behest of the f airy Concordia, has to wander in order finally to 
rescue her poor brothers. "Fearlessly, Tinchen stepped across the border into the 
enchanted land, all the while thinking only of her brothers. At first she noticed 
nothing unusual, but soon the way led through an enormous room entirely filled 
with toys. She saw small booths stocked with everything imaginable — carousels 
with miniature horses and carriages, swings and rocking horses, but above all the 
most splendid dollhouses. Around a small covered table, large dolls were sitting 
on easy chairs ; and as Tinchen turned her gaze upon them, the largest and most 
beautiful of these dolls stood up, made her a gracious bow, and spoke to her in a 
little voice of exquisite refinement." The child may not want to hear of toys that 



are bewitched, but the evil spell of this slippery path readily takes the form, even 
today, of large animated dolls. □ Advertising D [Zl,2] 



"The fashion is supposed to have been invented by Longchamps. I've not seen 
anything new, but tomorrow in their bulletins all the "Friendly Sprites," all the 
"Petits Couriers des Dames," all the "Psyches" will report on new attire that was 
already designed and available hefore Longchamps ever came on the scene. I 
strongly suspect that in many of the coaches, instead of the lady who would seem to 
he seated inside, there was only a dummy which the owners of these line vehicles 
had dressed according to their own taste in shawls and satins and silks." Karl 
Gutzkow, Btiefe am Par is (Leipzig, 1842), vol. 1, pp. 119-120. [Zl,3] 

From the Ombres Chinoises <Chinese Shadows) of the Palais-Royal: "A . . . 
demoiselle gave birth on stage, and the children could immediately scamper about 
like moles. There were four of them, and they danced together a few moments after 
the hirth in a pleasant quadrille. Another young woman started tossing her head 
vigorously, and in the twinkling of an eye a second demoiselle had stepped fully 
clothed from out of her head. This latter at once began dancing hut, the next 
minute, was seized in turn with head-shaking; these were lahor pains, and a third 
demoiselle stepped out of her head. She, too, immediately began dancing but soon 
took to tossing her head like the others, and out of her arose the fourth demoiselle. 
It continued in this manner until eight generations were there on the stage — all 
related to one another through spontaneous generation, like lice." J. F. Benzen- 
berg, Briefe geschrieben auf einer Reise nach Paris (Dortmund, 1805), vol. 1, 
p. 294. [Zl,4] 

At a certain point in time, the motif of the doll acquires a sociocritical sig- 
nificance. For example: "You have no idea how repulsive these automatons and 
dolls can become, and how one breathes at last on encountering a full-blooded 
being in this society." Paul Lindau, Der Abend (Berlin, 1896), p. 17. [Zl,5] 

"In a shop on the Rue Legendre, in Batignolles, a whole series of female busts, 
without heads or legs, with curtain hooks in place of arms and a percaline skin of 
arbitrary hue — bean hrown, glaring pink, hard black — are lined up like a row of 
onions, impaled on rods, or set out on tables. . . . The sight of this ehb tide of 
bosoms, this Musee Curtius of breasts, puts one vaguely in mind of those vaults in 
the Louvre where classical sculptures are housed, where one and the same torso, 
eternally repeated, beguiles the time for those who look it over, with a yawn, on 
rainy days. . . . How superior to the dreary statues of Venus they are — these dress- 
makers' mannequins , with their lifelike comportment; how much more provoca- 
tive these padded husts, which, exposed there, hring on a train of reveries: 
lihertine reveries, inspired by ephebic nipples and slightly hruised huhs; charita- 
ble reveries, recalling old breasts, shriveled with chlorosis or hloated with fat. — 
For one thinks of the sorrows of women who . . . experience the growing 
indifference of a husband, or the imminent desertion of a lover, or the final dis- 



arming of those charms which allowed them once to conquer, in the unavoidable 
battles they wage for the closed-up wallet of the man." J.-K. Huysmans, Croquis 
parisiens (Paris, 1886), pp. 129, 131-132 ("L'Etiage" <Ebb Tide>). [Zla,l] 



"Not long before the end of the Empire, a very special question arose: that of the 
Pupazzi. People wanted these wooden marionettes to perform Le Roi Prudhomme 
at the Theatre des Varietes. The cast of characters for this playlet included the 
Emperor, Emile Olivier, ... V. Hugo, . . . Gamhetta, . . . and Rochefort. . . . The 
piece had been performed in drawing rooms and even in the Tuileries. But these 
private performances did not in the least prepare for the effects of any public 
performance, and the authorities refused to allow . . . the theater to embark on 
this path." Victor Hallays-Dabot, La Censure dramatique et le theatre (1850- 
1870) (Paris, 1871), p. 86. [Zla,2] 

"In the competitions surrounding the material ornament ... of attire, the popu- 
larity of dolls is put to use. . . . The Little Bands (in which girls make up the 
majority) are entrusted with the presentation of dolls and mannequins, among 
which a choice is to be made." Charles Fourier, Le NouveauMon.de industriel et 
societaire (Paris, 1829), p. 252. [Zla,3] 

While writing Les Travailleurs de la mer <The Toilers of the Sea > , Victor Hugo 
kept before him a doll dressed in the antique garb of a Guernsey woman. Someone 
had procured it for him; it served as a model for Deruchette. [Zla,4] 

Marx explains that "the two material bases on which the preparations for ma- 
chine-operated industry proceeded within manufacture during the period from 
the sixteenth to the middle of the eighteenth century (the period in which manufac- 
ture was developing from handicraft into large-scale industry proper) were the 
clock and the mill (at first the corn mill, specifically, the water null). Both were 
inherited from the ancients. . . . The clock was the lirst automatic device applied 
to practical purposes; the whole theory of the production of regular motion was 
developed through it. Its nature is such that it is hased on a combination of semiar- 
tistic handicraft and direct theory. Cardanus, for instance, wrote ahout (and gave 
practical formulas for) the construction of clocks. German authors of the six- 
teenth century called clockmaking 'learned (nonguild) handicraft' and it would he 
possible to show from the development of the clock how entirely different the 
relation between science and practice was in the context of handicraft from what it 
is, for instance, in modern large-scale industry. There is also no doubt that in the 
eighteenth century the idea of applying automatic devices (moved by springs) to 
production was first suggested by the clock. It can be proved historically that 
Vaucanson's experiments along these lines had a tremendous influence on the 
imagination of English inventors. On the other hand, from the very beginning, as 
soon as the water mill was invented, the mill possessed the essential elements of the 
organism of a machine. The mechanical motive power. First, the motor, on which 
it depends; then the transmission mechanism; and finally the working machine, 



which deals with the material — each element existing independently of the others. 
The theory of friction, and with it the investigations into the mathematical forms 
of gear-wheels, cogs, and so forth, were all developed in connection with the mill; 
the same applies to the theory of measurement of the degree of motive power, of the 
best way of employing it, and so on. Almost all the great mathematicians since the 
middle of the seventeenth century, so far as they dealt with practical mechanics 
and worked out its theoretical side, started from the simple water-driven corn 
mill. And indeed this was why the name Miihle, 'mill,' which arose during the 
manufacturing period, came to be applied to all mechanical forms of motive power 
adapted to practical purposes. But in the case of the mdl, as in that of the press, 
the forge, the plough, and other implements, the work proper — that of beating, 
crushing, grinding, pulverizing, and so on — has been performed from the very 
first without human labor, even though the moving force was human or animal. 
This kind of machinery is therefore very ancient. . . . Hence, it is practically the 
only machinery found in the manufacturing period. The industrial revolution 
begins as soon as mechanisms are employed where, from ancient times, the final 
result has required human labor; hence not where, as with the tools mentioned 
above, the material actually to be worked up has never been dealt with by the 
human hand." Marx to Engels, January 28, 1863, from London [in Karl Marx and 
Friedrich Engels, Ausgewdhlte Briefe, ed. V. Adoratski (Moscow and Leningrad, 
1934), pp. 118-119]. 2 [Z2] 

In his study "La Mante religieuse: Recherches sur la nature et la signification du 
mythe" <The Praying Mantis: Investigations into the Nature and Meaning of 
Myth> , Caillois refers to the striking automatism of reflexes in the praying mantis 
(there is hardly a vital function that it does not also perform decapitated). He links 
it, on account of its fateful significance, with the baneful automatons known to us 
from myths. Thus Pandora: "automaton fahricated by the blacksmith god for the 
ruin of humankind, for that 'which all shall / take to their hearts with delight, an 
evil to love and embrace' (Hesiod, Works and Days, line 58). 3 We encounter some- 
thing similar in the Indian Krtya — those dolls, animated by sorcerers, which bring 
about the death of men who embrace them. Our literature as well, in the motif of 
femmes f atales, possesses the concept of a woman-machine, artificial, mechanical, 
at variance with all living creatures, and above all murderous. No douht psycho- 
analysis would not hesitate to explain this representation in its own terms by 
envisaging the relations hetween death and sexuality and, more precisely, by 
finding each amhiguously intimated in the other." Roger Caillois, "La Mante re- 
ligieuse: Recherches sur la nature et la signification du mythe," Mesures, 3, no. 2 
(April 15, 1937), p. 110. [Z2a,l] 



Baudelaire, in the section, "Les Femmes etles filles" < Women and Prostitutes) in 
his essay on Guys, cites the words of La Bruyere: "Some women possess an ar- 
tificial nobility which is associated with a movement of the eye, a tilt of the head, a 
manner of deportment, and which goes no further." Compare Baudelaire's "Le 



Mensonge." — In the same section, Baudelaire cites the concept of "the femina 
simplex of the Roman satirist" {L'Art romantique [Paris], p. 109). '' [Z2a,2] 

Beginnings of large-scale industry: "We find great numbers of peasants emigrating 
to the cities, where steam energy permits the concentration of factories that for- 
merly were scattered along the banks of rivers." Pierre-Maxime Schuhl, Ma- 
chinisme et philosophic (Paris, 1938), pp. 56-57. [Z2a,3] 

"Aristotle declares that slavery would cease to he necessary if only the shuttles and 
plectruins could set themselves going on their own. The idea accords admirably 
with his definition of the slave as animated instrument. ... By the same token, the 
ancient poet Pherecydes of Syros had told how the Dactyls, after huilding a new 
house for Zeus, had fashioned for him male and female servants as well. We are in 
the realm of fable. . . . Yet hefore three centuries have passed, an Anthology poet, 
Antiphilos of Byzantium, offers a response to Aristotle by singing of the invention 
of the water mill, which liberates women from the arduous task of grinding: 'Spare 
the hand that grinds the corn, 0 miller girls, and softly sleep. Let Chanticleer 
announce the morn in vain! Demeter has commanded that the girls' work be done 
by Nymphs, and now they skip lightly over the wheels, so that the shaken axles 
revolve with their spokes and pull round the load of revolving stones. Let us live 
the life of our fathers, and let us rest from work and enjoy the gifts that Demeter 
sends us." (Note: "Anthologie Palatine, vol. 9, p. 418. This epigram . . . has al- 
ready been related to the text of Aristotle, and for the first time, it would seem, hy 
Marx" — presumably, in Kapital, vol. 3 <trans. Molitor [Paris, 1924]>, p. 61.) 
Pierre-Maxime Schuhl, Machinisme et philosophic (Paris, 1938), pp. 19-20. ;> 

[Z3] 